Good morning.
Chairman Nordenberg, Leaders Ward, Costa, Benninghoff, and McClinton, thank you for holding this hearing and listening to our concerns.
Having worked as a Senate staff member in the 1990s and closely observed that redistricting process, I recognize the tough job you have.
When you make changes to one district, you must then make changes to many districts.
I am a supervisor in West Manchester Township, York County.
The board at our reorganization meeting this Monday authorized me to present you with our concerns about the preliminary Senate map, which moves our township from the 28th Senate district to the 31st Senate district.
York City and West York Borough are also included in this move.
I also note Manchester Township continues in the 31st district under this preliminary map.
We oppose moving West Manchester Township to the 31st from the 28th district, as we believe this would violate the criterion of keeping communities of interest together in legislative districts.
The central municipalities in York County form a community of interest.
These municipalities include the city of York, the county's hub, along with those municipalities which are adjacent or nearly adjacent to the city: West Manchester, Spring Garden, Manchester, Springettsbury and York townships, and West and North York boroughs.
People living in these municipalities largely, though of course not exclusively, work in these communities as well.
So there is strong economic connection in that regard.
Even stronger economic ties exist among these communities as residents of these areas typically spend their money there.
Residents of what I see as Metro York shop at the West Manchester Towne Center, and the York Galleria.
On Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays, we go to York's Central Market, and on these days, as well as First Fridays, we patronize many of the restaurants and growing specialty shops in downtown York.
We follow minor league baseball watching the York Revolution at People's Bank Park, and take in cultural events at downtown York's Appell Center or Penn State York's Pullo Center.
We watch movies at the York Towne Center's Regal Cinemas.
Conversely, people in the 31st Senate District are part of the Harrisburg Metro.
This district is based on Cumberland County's West Shore, and extends, as it has for the past few decades, into northern York County.
This area includes Dillsburg Borough, Fairview, Newberry, and Monaghan townships, along with some other more rural municipalities a bit farther south in York County, which have stronger ties to the West Shore/Harrisburg metro Community of Interest, than Metro York.
Many people who live in these northern York County municipalities work on the West Shore or in Harrisburg.
They shop and go to the movies at Camp Hill's Capital City Mall or the East Shore's Harrisburg Mall.
Current 315t district residents, including those living in northern York County, frequent Second Street's Restaurant Row in downtown Harrisburg, and enjoy Saturday Nights in the City there.
These folks take in cultural events at downtown Harrisburg's Whittaker Center or Penn State-Harrisburg's Kulkarni Theater, and enjoy minor league baseball watching the Harrisburg Senators at FNB Field on City Island.
At the heart of many communities in central Pennsylvania is high school sports.
Here, too, West Manchester Township and the rest of Metro York resides in a clearly different Community of Interest from the West Shore and northern York County.
The West York Bulldogs, as well as York City, play in the York-Adams League.
Many of the York County schools now part of the 31st district, including Northern York and Cedar Cliff, part of the West Shore School District, which itself spans two counties, play in the Mid-Penn Conference.
They compete with Camp Hill, East Pennsboro, Cumberland Valley, Harrisburg, and Central and Lower
Dauphin.
Very different Communities of Interest.
So, I ask you to consider strongly keeping West Manchester Township, as well as our neighboring municipalities, all together in the 28th Senate District.
This is where our Community of Interest lies.
We largely live, work, spend our money, and enjoy our leisure time together.
Putting us in a district based in Cumberland County's West Shore, and including that part of York County which identifies with the West Shore and Metro Harrisburg, does us a disservice.
We would become a minority in a district which often has different needs and interests.
This would make it very difficult for any one legislator to represent all constituents well.
I respect the work you are doing, and again acknowledge the difficult task you have.
Thank you for listening to my comments on behalf of the 19,206 residents | represent, and I would be happy to try and answer any questions you have.
