"Downloaded from https://www.legis.ga.gov/joint-office/reapportionment/public-comments on March 9, 2022"
C. JOHNSON of Columbia County
"Georgia should have added 7-8 Maga friendly districts, but instead the Democrats are laughing at us https://nymag.com/intelligencer/2021/12/democrats-are-doing-weirdly-well-in-redistricting.html. But we have pathetic ""leadership"" like Ralston, who needs to be replaced. Total corruption. Too bad Stacy Abrams is a communist. Shes the only one up there with balls. All Republican ""leadership"" up there needs replacement. Georgia swamp."

12/30/2021D. Knowlton of Columbia County
"Where are the conservatives on this, and why aren’t they up in arms about this blatant liberal power grab! This is unsatisfactory and should immediately be withdrawn for reconsideration. We are standing up to this nonsense! Enough is enough. You are on notice, if you support this we will not vote for you in the primaries nor the general election. Don’t give away the state to the democrats."

12/29/2021M. Greenberg of DeKalb County
What is going on with redistricting? Georgia Republicans should be getting 7 to 8 more seats. I am fed up with this type of passivity from Republicans in my state and if this is not corrected immediately there will be consequences in the primaries.

12/9/2021S. Moore of DeKalb County
I am requesting a meeting with Mr Larry Johnson and/or District 4 commissioner

12/9/2021S. Moore of DeKalb County
Can I rec a copy of minitues concerning district boundaries smloveme63@yahoo.com

12/9/2021S. Moore of DeKalb County
Can I rec a copy of minitues concerning district boundaries smloveme63@yahoo.com

12/2/2021C. Pleiss of DeKalb County
NO on redistricting. It makes no sense to split Dunwoody into two districts. We are ONE city and our state vote should reflect that unity.

12/1/2021A. Bailey of Macon County
"I am advocating for my community, Macon, to be brought together as a Community of Interest. This area includes Mercer University, Wesleyan College, and Middle Georgia University. A community where people share values of liberal education, community, and history. Currently, my community is situated in Congressional Districts 8 and 2, State House Districts 26 and 18, and State Senate Districts 141, 142, and 143. The split between communities is on multiple district levels and routinely separates the demographics of Macon’s college students. I believe that if Macon has similar lines drawn around the city on all levels, we would be better represented. Communities of Interest must be considered as part of Georgia’s redistricting process. College students have shared interests and policy concerns that should not be fractured among multiple districts. College students must have the opportunity to elect representatives who will understand and advocate for their unique concerns."

11/30/2021N. Childs of Camden County
Quite frankly.

11/30/2021M. Jackson of Chatham County
"As a Black person in America, Redistricting is another code word to dilute the Black votes. We fought for so long to have the right to vote but Republicans are using the same Jim Crow tactics to silence our voice! This is another way for the Republicans to keep them in power so they will be successful in keeping racist laws on the book that further cripples the Black community. If we allow Redistricting to continue to happen, The Republicans next step will be to make Black people count the number of marbles in a jar!!"

11/28/2021J. Palgon of Fulton County
"This map is a MAJOR abuse of power by the far-right, corrupt politicians. The Atlanta suburbs turned from a conservative powerhouse to increasingly liberal for a reason."

11/27/2021M. Waltham-Lewis of Gwinnett County
"How dare you violate your civil duty in the name of keeping the power. It is simply not an issue of right or left, it's right or wrong. It is HIGHLY immoral and a MAJOR abuse of your entrusted powers to draw up district maps that are focused on empowering one party over the other. It is of paramount importance that redistricting is done with the sole intention of reflecting shifts in population to match the representation received by Georgians in their legislative assembly. As a Georgian citizen, speaking for myself and my fellow Georgians, I must firmly request that you please reconsider this map. Thank you."

11/26/2021D. Mitton of Madison County
"As usual, it's the far right-wing abusing their power to stop fair elections."

11/25/2021S. Shodiya-zeumault of Fulton County
"This gerrymandering is a blatant abuse of power, harmful to communities and simply wrong. We need FAIR MAPS!"

11/24/2021G. Glass of Thomas County
"Sabotaging State maps is an existential threat and catastrophic risk that will tear the US at the seams ultimately hurting us all. Proverbs 22:8 Whoever sows injustice will reap calamity, and the rod of his fury will fail."

11/24/2021J. Palgon of Fulton County
THIS MAP IS A BLATANT ABUSE OF POWER! DO NOT ENACT! WE CAN DO BETTER!

11/23/2021R. Gillespie of DeKalb County
Georgia needs a nonpartisan approach to drawing districts. Any fool can see the proposed redistricting targets Lucy McBath. Redrawing the map to combine Sandy Springs and Alpharetta with Forsyth and Dawson Counties is ridiculous.

11/23/2021J. Palgon of Fulton County
The proposed map by the republicans is a blatant power grab and abuse of power. WE NEED FAIR MAPS NOW!

11/23/2021C. Lambrecht of Fulton County
"While some may believe that gerrymandering is both lawful and constitutional, it is clearly corrupt. When you cheat the system to win, where will it stop?"

11/23/2021R. Schlegel of Cobb County
"This is a clear partisan power grab by the GQP because they are scared that Georgia is turning blue. When conservatives cannot win with conservative values, they will not abandon conservatism, they will abandon democracy. Never been more apparent."

11/22/2021J. Palgon of Fulton County
"This proposed map is clearly intended to prevent liberal minorities from having their voice heard. There is no reason why the 6th district should be safe red. The Republicans can't beat Lucy McBath on the issues, so they decide to steal her district from her. Pathetic. Do NOT sign this map."

11/22/2021J. Palgon of Fulton County
DO NOT SIGN THE NEW MAP INTO LAW!!!!

11/22/2021R. Hall of Fulton County
I vote NO NO NO to this redistricting.

11/22/2021S. Camp of Cherokee County
"I have no interest in being represented by Lucy McBath. In fact, I recently moved to Cherokee in part because I did not like the political changes occurring in Cobb. Because there are more Democrats in the other counties in her district than there are Republicans in that small corner of Cherokee, she will stay in office and I will no longer be represented by someone who shares my political views. The Republicans in Cherokee are just as upset as the Democrats in her current district are. In other words, none of us like the change."

11/22/2021S. Schneider of Fulton County
"I strongly object to the proposed changes to District 6. I live in Alpharetta and do not share the values of the majority in Forsyth and Dawson counties or I would have moved there. Redrawing our District to include these areas will skew the election results leaving me without a fair chance to elect a person who represents my values. This redrawing of my district effectively eliminates my representation in our government. This is more than a racial issue (although that is part of it), it is a partisan right to representation."

11/22/2021R. Cail of DeKalb County
"The Georgia General Assembly should be ashamed of their consistent attempts to silence the voices of the people. Doreen Carter adheres to the motto of ""Wisdom, justice and moderation."" Why would the General Assembly split her district and put her in a majority white district hoping she won't be re-elected. This GERRYMANDERING will prevent her from addressing the needs her constituents in Southeast Dekalb. On top of that horrible tactic they put someone in the district who does not know the people in the new district 86. General Assembly, ""How are you going to win when you ain't right within?"""

11/21/2021R. Goldman of Cobb County
I live in District 6 and Lucy McBath has done an excellent job representing her constituents. This proposed change to the 6th is despicable and is the epitome of gerrymandering. Please do the right thing!

11/21/2021J. Huddleston of Fannin County
"I learned about gerrymandering ln Junior high school, way back - I'm 84. The only way yo be fair in drawing the maps is going by physical attributes such as rivers or mountain ridges here in rural parts of the state. In the cities going by school districts would make sense. It is tradition but not ethical to learn about each voter's affiliation to set the boundaries. The Constitution calls for ""...not more than one (representative) for every 30,000..."" (citizens) in Article 1, Section 2. Would any school district rate more?"

11/21/2021T. KRUZAN of DeKalb County
There was not enough give & take in developing the new voting district maps - the fast-tracked and non-transparent process is another way of reducing public trust in our elected officials and the degrading of our Democracy. We can do better.

11/21/2021J. Palgon of Fulton County
DO NOT PASS THIS PROPOSED MAP.

11/21/2021K. Smith of Cobb County
"What this assembly has done has essentially gutted communities of color, as well as drawn lines with rural Georgia mixing in with the larger suburbs. It seems that people from both parties are unhappy with this. Why is this even being considered? We vote our representatives in because we want them to be our voices. Our voices are being silenced here. As a long time Cobb County resident, I moved to get away from Barry Loudermilk, as his views do not represent what I, as a constituent, wants. I voted for Lucy McBath. She represents me, and many others in our district (who are unhappy with these maps). Now you're gerrymandering me back into Loudermilk's hands? That's partisan BS and you all know it."

11/21/2021K. Krummert of Forsyth County
"The redistricting maps, together with SB202, illustrate once again that the Georgia Assembly that this state is afraid of change, by redistricting against population trends and making voting much harder (especially for the disabled/homebound, elderly, those without internet, and with the imposition of painfully squeezed ability to use absentee ballots). A forward-thinking Assembly would show it is not only afraid of change by making voting easier, not harder, offering forward-looking policy proposals and deploying an independent redistricting commission."

11/20/2021N. Agramonte of Fulton County
"As a resident of Roswell and Fulton County, I am concerned about the efforts to redistribute the voters of our community into a new map than seems driven more by political partisanship than by governing logic or community planning. The communities of Roswell, Alpharetta, East Cobb and Dunwoody have similar demographics, layout, and community interests. These areas have little in common with Forsyth and Dawson counties and it will make it harder for our member of congress to fight for our interests in a way that will allow our communities to continue to thrive personally and economically. I urge you to vote against this proposed map in favor of something not dissimilar to the the current congressional map."

11/20/2021S. Joseph of Fulton County
"The new districts have only 1 purpose, prevent voters of color, women and anyone who voted differently than the wishes of the dominant Republican legislature from having their vote count. Sandy Springs and our view of the world is very different from Dawson county yet that’s our new district. Our views be overwhelmed and neutralized by the new district. That is in direct opposition to the redistricting intent “not separating communities of interest “."

11/20/2021L. Severo of Fulton County
This is dripping with voter suppression. We know what this is really about. For a true democracy -- Stop gerrymandering.

11/20/2021B. Menke of Athens-Clarke County
"There is no future for partisan gerrymandering, with another million new Georgia residents expected in in cities in coming years. If you are a Republican, you have a rapidly diminishing aging rural base. Time to get real and stop the gerrymandering nonsense. It will not save you."

11/20/2021J. Palgon of Fulton County
STOP WITH THE GERRYMANDERING!!!!!

11/20/2021L. Gratton of DeKalb County
"I urge to find a more equitable, mathematical, formula for redistricting the population. Each person is entitled to a vote, and each vote should count equally. This is not what Republicans are doing. For a party that aligns themselves with Christianity, I can only point out that this is not what Christianity is all about. It does little to shame or appeal to good sense when eyes are totally blinded by greed and power."

11/20/2021K. Menke of Athens-Clarke County
"As a resident of Clarke County, I am disturbed that Clarke is divided into 4 State House Districts and 2 State Senate Districts! I thought one requirement of redistricting was that Communities of interest not be separated. This is a clear violation of that requirement."

11/20/2021L. Clarke of DeKalb County
"It is very clear that this is an effort to make it harder for Democratic voters to get the representation they want. If the consciences of those attempting to take our rights don’t stop this, it should be illegal!"

11/20/2021L. Campbell of Cobb County
"My family has lived in Cobb County since the 1940’s. During this time, Cobb has grown from a population of 38k to 768k+ and we’ve seen a significant increase in diversity. 2020 Census results show that in Cobb, non-Hispanic whites constitute a plurality not a majority. White residents who are not Hispanic or Latino make up 48.2% of the population. The white alone share of population declined from 62.2% to 50.6% from 2010-2020. The proportion of Cobb Countians who are Black, Asian, Hispanic or two or more races all increased. While Cobb has expanded greatly, the Congressional maps presented split Cobb into four districts. This is “cracking” to the highest degree, a blatant effort to ignore diversity and an attempt to divide and diminish our choices, voices, and votes. The proposed map for Cobb is a discriminatory effort to structure the lines so that they align with partisan politics. The better answer for fair representation would be to create a single Congressional District for Cobb."

11/20/2021R. Popkin of Cobb County
"This state needs to be shamed both locally and nationally. These tactics of taking away people’s votes that they don’t like should be advertised so businesses will know before they move that their employees will face this bias if they relocate here. You may live in the metro area but they’ll make you vote with the country folk. As a white native Atlantan, voting with Forsyth county citizens is horrifying to me."

11/20/2021N. Porter of DeKalb County
"Hello. I am a resident of the current 6th CD. I do not see any reason for major changes. To me this is a clear gerrymandering intended for disadvantage the incumbent. This is a community of interest where we live and shop and have friends who are here. The current CD is COMPETITIVE district, by turning this into a safe district our votes are diluted and our voices no longer count. The democrats map which wasn't given a vote demonstrates no need to change based on population. Please vote NO on this map. Best Regards,"

11/20/2021H. McIntyre of DeKalb County
"Sorry I was unable to speak in person this morning, so I'm glad to have the opportunity to at least write my comments. I live in NE Dekalb, District 6, Congresswomen Lucy McBath's district. I urge you to keep Dist. 6th lines fair, completive and diverse. Similar to how it currently is. I am at the southern end of this district and with the proposed new map, I would be pushed out. Rep. McBath is who the people voted for, not once, but twice. She cares about making sure our communities are safe and creating jobs, for everyone. She cares about veterans and people with disabilities, like me. The people of District 6 went to the polls and their voices were heard. That is what democracy looks like. Please keep Rep. McBath's district lines representative of the people."

11/20/2021R. Popkin of Cobb County
"As a 64 year old native of Atlanta, I live on the river between Sandy Springs and East Cobb. I was taught and grew up fearing the racist culture present in Forsyth County. The fact that now you intend for me to be placed with this community is the most upsetting thing you’ve done yet! Just because you lost an election now you want to punish us that voted in it? This is absurd! I shouldn’t have to pay taxes in a state that has just taken my vote away! That’s taxation without representation."

11/20/2021K. Fagan of Fulton County
"This naked attempt to entrench Republican legislators is anti-democratic, un-American and deeply divisive. We deserve legislators that represent all voters, not just one party. We deserve a government that seeks to exert the will of the people, not subvert it. We deserve elected officials committed to upholding the principles of the Constitution, not trample upon it for their own ends. GEORGIA DESERVES BETTER."

11/20/2021A. Goldberg of Fulton County
This map does not represent any area of interest. I have suburban concerns. You have put me into two rural counties. This is not representation. It is republican fear.

11/20/2021R. Dent of Fulton County
"I am a nonminority lifelong resident who values the diversity of our community and strongly believe we are stronger as a community, a state, a nation, when every person’s voice is expressed by a fair vote. I am disgusted by the efforts of the GA Republican party who, through gerrymandering & vote suppression, seek to make white votes dominant even in majority-minority areas. It is telling that State Senator Dr. Michelle Au & US Rep McBath are both nonwhite female Democrats who, if the R-drawn maps are adopted, face drastically worse, unnaturally unfair odds in their new districts. Also, what proportion of public input has been against, vs for, the GOP-drawn maps? Doesn’t that matter? To accuse a political entity of racism & cheating is a very serious thing. However we clearly see the racism & cheating in this process. If the maps are implemented, the people of Georgia will have the receipts, & we will use them. All are created equal & should be treated as such. Even in Georgia."

11/20/2021S. Moreno of Fulton County
Please. My goodness! This is blatant abuse of power and your constituents are watching. We must be on the right side of history here. The districts need to represent the population not be further sliced & diced to create districts to prevent fair elections. Integrity matters. Fair elections support democracy.

11/20/2021K. Clark of Fulton County
"The redistributing of GA 06 is completely unreasonable. North Fulton County residents have totally different concerns about transportation, infrastructure, and quality of life than Dawson County residents and should not be lumped together for representation purposes. This is a blatant, desperate attempt to water down a left-leaning district with more right-leaning voters. This will only result in political gridlock and resentment of hundreds of thousands of Fulton residents toward their northern neighbors. The Georgia GOP is slowly tearing this state apart with these maps. Redraw a more compact GA 06."

11/20/2021D. D of Fulton County
"I am furious at the abandonment of fairness shown by the Republican Party in their proposed district maps. The intent is clearly to shift blue/purple districts to improbable red advantage, & unseat female Democrat incumbents in the process - for example, District 6 represented by Rep Lucy McBath. Why wasn’t maintaining integrity of District 6 a priority as it was for other districts? North Fulton cities share interests on a variety of issues including regional planning, transit & transportation, solutions for affordable housing, & more. These common interests mean that North Fulton is still best served by having 1 US Congressional representative, not by splitting us up & putting some of us in a very dissimilar district. Dividing GA06 makes no sense. The US government derives its power from the consent of the governed & depends on fair representation OF THE PEOPLE. The GOP-proposed maps represent a bastardization of the principle & process. I urge the committee to reject them."

11/20/2021J. Palgon of Fulton County
"The proposed map is not only unfair but also racially biased. It splits up minority communities in North Fulton, DeKalb, and Cobb. WHY WON'T YOU LISTEN TO YOUR CONSTITUENTS?! THE PEOPLE ARE CLEARLY FURIOUS."

11/20/2021J. Palgon of Fulton County
"Georgia is a Blue State, not a Q state!"

11/20/2021J. Palgon of Fulton County
We need Lucy McBath in Congress!!!!!

11/20/2021C. Shelton of Athens-Clarke County
"Yet another shameful flouting of laws and voters by the cheating, lying GOP. I’m not surprised when they have scum like Greene there. It isn’t fair to the people who live in Democratic strongholds. So maybe it’s time we voted these people out of office. Remember this next time elections happen, people."

11/20/2021A. Randall of Fulton County
I am appalled by the new district maps. It is evident that the goal was to unseat Lucy McBath. This is shameful behavior and abuse of power.

11/20/2021L. Randall of Fulton County
"The proposed redistricting map is appalling. Lucy McBath won fairly in our district and solidly won re-election, and this is a blatant attempt to get her out of Congress and dilute the votes of Democrats and people of color. When the majority of a state’s population votes Democrat for president and senators, but that same state has only 6 Democrats out of 14 House reps and would only have 5 with the new map, clearly the map is not being drawn in a fair or nonpartisan way. Do the right thing and let candidates compete fairly."

11/20/2021M. Martin of Gwinnett County
"If you must cheat to win, then you obviously don't represent anything the majority of voters want! Start listening to those you represent and you might not need to cheat!"

11/20/2021P. Dunn of Cobb County
"Disenfranchising the majority of voters in a district like the 6th congressional isn't just gerrymandering. It's forcing voters in the state's third largest county to fight possible representation by MTG, who even most Republicans know is not a good example of a member of Congress. Gov. Kemp needs to remember that he represents ALL Georgians. People do not want to do business in a place where restrictive policies disenfranchise the majority of the voters, especially women and people of color who already are restricted by other laws."

11/19/2021L. Davis of Cobb County
"Cobb County has a population of nearly 1 million. We have made our voices heard in the last 2 election cycles. Biden/Harris won. Ossoff/Warnock won. Abrams and Hillary won. Lucy McBath won her (my) district fairly. You are unfairly pushing her into a GOP stronghold to silence the will of the voters. It is HORRIBLE representation to split Cobb into 4 areas, all held by republicans. Cobb deserves better. Fulton deserves better. This is egregious. Please reconsider."

11/19/2021L. Davis of Cobb County
This map is an attempt to dilute voters of colors and democratic strongholds. Cobb voted blue and they will have FOUR GOP reps? That is not representation! What you're doing to McBath is horrible. And no one I know in West Cobb wants MGT.

11/19/2021J. Palgon of Fulton County
Why in God's name is Alpharetta in one district and Johns Creek in another??

11/19/2021J. Palgon of Fulton County
The proposed map by Republicans is racially gerrymandered. STOP SILENCING MINORITY VOICES!

11/19/2021J. Palgon of Fulton County
DO NOT ENACT THE PROPOSED MAP!!!!!

11/19/2021J. Palgon of Fulton County
"GOVERNOR KEMP, PLEASE DON'T ENACT THE NEW MAP. IT'S UNREFLECTIVE OF GEORGIA AND YOU KNOW IT!"

11/19/2021J. Palgon of Fulton County
"Keep ALL of North Fulton together: Johns Creek, Roswell, Alpharetta, Milton, Sandy Springs."

11/19/2021T. Gagne of DeKalb County
"Please oppose the proposed redistricting. The new map doesn’t reflect my household, nor my neighborhood, and takes away our voices in elections. We have the right to be heard in elections, and any redistricting should reflect our voice, and not silence us."

11/19/2021J. Walsh of Fulton County
The residents of North Fulton and specifically Johns Creek have not had an opportunity to weigh in on these maps. We need more time. Keeping North Fulton whole is greatly more important for local issues than adding Dawson and Forsyth to US 6. How does Dawson or even Forsyth have anything to do with Sandy Springs? Absolutely nothing - except creating a mostly white Republican majority district. Have you no shame? Have you no moral compass? Have you no courage? No. You do not. You can’t win elections legitimately so you manufacture districts to ensure victory. You’re amoral and an embarrassment. You should be ashamed of yourself. I believe you and your fellow “gamers” are cowards. John’s creek grew by what? 600 voters. Please! Your rationale is as biased as your obvious racism.

11/19/2021K. Adams of Decatur County
"Drawing new voting districts should be done by a non-partisan commission, of by politicians drawing districts to protect their party or their jobs. The Republican maps are clearly partisan, and should not be approved. We need to insure equal representation for all Georgians"

11/19/2021J. Palgon of Fulton County
"We the constituents of the 6th District really like Lucy McBath representing us. Why are you trying to take our voice away? There is no reason that rural, white, and conservative Forsyth, Cherokee, and Dawson Counties should be represented by the same people in liberal North Fulton, Cobb, and Atlanta. THE REPUBLICAN PARTY HAS ONCE AGAIN FAILED GEORGIA. SHAME ON YOU ALL!"

11/19/2021P. Peterson of Athens-Clarke County
Be fair in redistricting! Do not carve up Clarke County like a Thanksgiving turkey. We are a progressive community and should be represented by such legislators.

11/19/2021L. Becker of Oconee County
"Please create districts that reflect communities of interest, rather than the desires of the parties and candidates to make political gain. I believe the Congressional maps the majority party released on Sept. 27 and on Nov. 17 greatly improve the boundaries of the 10th Congressional District. But these maps fail for the 6th District and the 7th District. Please do not pass the map as presented on Nov. 17."

11/19/2021J. Wilson of DeKalb County
Zulma Lopez does not represent the interests of the Unincorporated Dekalb County that borders the City of Stonecrest. She is Central and South Dekalb has different interest. How is it that this precinct has been pulled into Clarkston and North Dekalb County? Vote to oppose this move for the Miller Grove Middle precinct.

11/19/2021J. Burns of Cherokee County
"If you can only win by cheating, you need to stop! This is blatant voter suppression and citizens of Georgia will not let this go. Redraw maps that are fair to everyone rather than maps that benefit one party."

11/19/2021D. Borremans of Athens-Clarke County
"We are glad to live in Athens Clarke county for the last 25 years ago, our ACC voters do not have conservative values as a whole and we will continue to push back and create challenges for politicians that strip us if our voice through unfair re-districting."

11/19/2021M. Myers of Washington County
Let's N O T MAKE A P U B L I C == M O C K E R Y== OF OUR DEMOCRACY!!!!!!!!!!

11/19/2021M. Dilbeck of Cherokee County
Don't try legislating what you can't honestly win. Don't pre-steal an election.

11/19/2021J. Kuniansky of DeKalb County
Please keep my home in an area represented by the voters and do NOT redraw the area of representation!

11/19/2021A. Bovingdon of Haralson County
"Please redraw and reconsider. These proposed maps are not representative of what Georgia actually looks like, will lock communities across the state out of political representation for a decade, and will rig the system in favor of incumbents and political insiders."

11/19/2021S. Hoagland of Fannin County
The newly REDRAWN districting Map. Is a dishonest attempt To Stack up area with heavy Republican. Votes. It does not Represent a. Equally balanced (R or D) Volume of potential voters

11/19/2021J. Sanders of Gwinnett County
"Edit from previous post (because I can't revise): 11th district, not 10th (though, I'd be a fan of the 10th being more competitive as well)."

11/19/2021J. Pruss of Cobb County
"Given the technology available today, both parties have the ability to gerrymander districts to artificially create advantages for their candidates. The processes by which these gerrymanders are created are well documented and understood by state and national party leaders, and various courts across the country. So why on earth do we as a country tolerate these gerrymanders when we know they are unfair to one party or the other, and most importantly unfair to Americans who value democracy? The same technology and processes could be used by independent groups/commissions to create fairer districts, using more objective and transparent means, that would better reflect and represent the demographic and political attributes of the American electorate. It's time for this ""to the victor go the spoils"" approach to democracy to end. Consequently, I urge both parties to subject the proposed Georgia redistricting map to objective analysis before rubber stamping it along party lines."

11/19/2021J. Sanders of Gwinnett County
"To whom it may concern: I am moderate, former reliably Republican, voter from Duluth. I ask that you sincerely reconsider these boundaries for congressional districts. The proposed boundaries highlight a partisan goal rather than representing the people of those areas, particularly the suburban areas that tend to be more purple rather than blue or red. Personally, I'd rather have these districts (7th, 6th, 10th, etc.) be more in the middle rather than solid red or blue, as that's how our communities (at least in Gwinnett) are. That way, whoever is running on either side has a legitimate shot to earn our votes. Please consider looking to an independent source to put together a district map. That way it can be fair and clearly represent the consituents. Thank you, J. Blair Sanders"

11/19/2021T. Raffa of Cobb County
"The proposed maps will include redrawing the 6th Congressional District seat currently held by Representative Lucy McBath. Rep. McBath has won the last two elections in the 6th District. This is indicative of her broad appeal and thoughtful and positive representation of the 6th. The proposed changes to the 6th are designed specifically to dilute Cobb, Sandy Springs and parts of North Fulton's political power. Basically, the expression of political will of the 6th District is going to be overturned, undermined and diluted by this map. The proposed 6th District, will create extremism within the District instead of moderation. The current 6th District requires a successful candidate to appeal to a broad swath of the electorate: Democrats, Republicans and Independents alike. Whereas, non-competitive Districts tend to promote Candidates with more extreme views on either side of the proverbial ""aisle"". Why do this in these hyper-polarized times?"

11/19/2021S. Myers of Cobb County
"Also ... gerrymandering the drawing of districts is CHEATING and should not be allowed. If they can't do it in a non-partisan manner, it should be taken away from them and given to a non-partisan group to handle. Votes of We the People should count; not rigged elections by cheating with ""stacking the deck"" by gerrymandering the district to give political favor to ANY political party. It's disgraceful."

11/19/2021R. Rappaport-McCord of Cherokee County
The districts need to represent the population not be gerrymandered to create districts to prevent fair elections. Integrity matters. Do the right thing vs cheating to try and force a win. Fair elections support democracy not the authoritarian regime you are seeking.

11/19/2021B. Hollis of DeKalb County
"I agree with M. Schafer of Cobb County I am totally opposed to the new redistricting/gerrymandering. Districts should be drawn on a logical geographic basis to include all residents of that area. Let's force our representatives to listen to and represent ALL of the people in that area, even if it means actual compromise! i do not want to be represented by the radical fringe who have no incentive to listen to ideas other than their own. The USA is theoretically a democracy. Let's act like it. We the people vote for our leaders!"

11/19/2021S. Myers of Cobb County
"I say ""NO!"" to Marjorie Green. She has horrible public behavior and regressive attitudes & opinions and does not deserve the right to represent us in any manner whatsoever."

11/19/2021B. McMaster of Jasper County
The redistricting maps show a blatant gerrymandering. The House and Senate Committees need to do a better job.

11/19/2021C. P of Fayette County
"It looks like the proposed maps were drawn to be as partisan as possible, instead of keeping communities of similar interests (urban, rural, etc.) together. If politicians can't do this correctly, we need an independent commission to do it."

11/19/2021S. Franklin of DeKalb County
This gerrymander is erasing the chance for thousands of people to be represented. I'm in GA-06 & it is OFFENSIVE the lengths GA Republicans will go to silence the voice of democrat voters by drawing these ridiculously contorted maps. Try better policy. Rewriting maps to amplify R votes & silence D votes is cheating. Will the committee respond to the many comments by people concerned about this blatant outrageously partisan outcome?

11/19/2021A. Day of Forsyth County
Blatant gerrymandering.

11/19/2021R. D of Fulton County
"Is anyone in the commission paying any attention at all to these comments? From what I see and watch, the majority of the comments express opposition to the unfairness of the maps and the rushed, non-transparent process. However the actions of the commission do not indicate they give public input any thought whatsoever."

11/19/2021D. Wallace of Cobb County
"If you are an independent, libertarian, conservative or republican, if you take the time to delve into what Marjorie Taylor Greene believes and stands for, you're likely going to welcome and support her representation for Cobb County. If you are a liberal, or Democrat, you'll likely abhor her as your representative. Nothing new under the stars here....our country is split about 50/50....Go Marjorie!"

11/19/2021M. Schafer of Cobb County
"I am totally opposed to the new redistricting/gerrymandering. Districts should be drawn on a logical geographic basis to include all residents of that area. Let's force our representatives to listen to and represent ALL of the people in that area, even if it means actual compromise! i do not want to be represented by the radical fringe who have no incentive to listen to ideas other than their own. The USA is theoretically a democracy. Let's act like it."

11/19/2021J. Palgon of Fulton County
PLEASE keep the 6th District blue!!! We love Lucy McBath and she represents our values!!!

11/19/2021K. Lawler of Fulton County
"(Part 6)Overall grades: • Princeton rates the Senate Committee proposal a C and the Democratic Caucus map a B. We encourage you to craft a compromise map that provides: • A fairer partisan balance of 8R-6D, which would likely earn a more favorable grade. • At least 1 competitive district (+/- 3.5% partisan lean) • 9-10 districts for minority representation."

11/19/2021K. Lawler of Fulton County
"(Part 5)Minority representation: • The current Congressional map provides minorities 9 districts in which to elect candidates of their choice: 5 districts in which minorities are a majority, and 4 minority influence districts (minorities 37% - 50%). • The Senate committee’s map provides only 8 such districts, one fewer than the 9/27 proposal. • The Democratic map has 10 such districts, better for minority representation. Communities of Interest • Committee and caucus map both split Columbus. Athens is united. • Two clearly defined communities in Columbus are split."

11/19/2021K. Lawler of Fulton County
"(Part 4) • Specifics for the caucus proposal: o There is one competitive district. o Democratic and Republican voters are somewhat evenly distributed. Projections indicate that there are not as many lopsided wins using this map. o The major change is to the 10th district that has been moved from eastern Georgia into metro Atlanta. Over 775,000 voters are thus moved out of and into this district. This is a dramatic change designed to create a new Democratic-leaning district."

11/19/2021K. Lawler of Fulton County
"(Part 3) • Specifics for the Senate committee proposal: o There are no competitive districts (46.5%-53.5%). o Democratic voters are packed into the 5D districts while Republican voters are more efficiently distributed. Projections indicate there will be more lopsided wins using this map. o The major change is to the 6th district. GA06 was only 650 voters over the ideal population. In the proposed map, 350,000 voters were moved out of GA06 and another 350,000 were moved in, 46% of the population. The core of this district is shattered, not preserved. And the new map clearly aims to create a very safe GA06, with an estimated vote share of 59%R-41%D, 4 points more tilted than the 9/27 draft."

11/19/2021K. Lawler of Fulton County
"(Part 2) Before we look at the results, let me provide some perspective. The 1-million-map benchmark reveals that the partisan gap in Georgia has narrowed considerably compared to 10 years ago. And our current Congressional delegation of 8 Republicans and 6 Democrats reflects this, a net shift of 2 seats over the last 2 elections. Our benchmarks also indicate that the opportunities for minority representation have grown based on the census. Here is our evaluation of the 2 proposals. Partisan balance: • Both the Senate committee and Democratic caucus maps lean too far towards their respective parties. Our benchmarks indicate that the best choice for partisan balance is 8 Republican and 6 Democratic districts. The Senate map is designed as 9R-5D while the Democratic map is designed as 7R-7D. Neither map reflects the natural political preferences of Georgia’s voters."

11/19/2021K. Lawler of Fulton County
"(Part 1) This committee promised the public a fair and transparent process. While the release of a draft congressional map on September 27 was a step in the right direction, the release of the real map just hours before the hearings is a giant step backward. This process leaves almost no time for meaningful public analysis and comment on the final maps, which was requested time and again throughout the summer hearings. Nonetheless my testimony today will address the new map from the committee and the map proposed by the Democratic caucus on October 21. This analysis is produced jointly by FDGA and the Princeton Gerrymandering Project. At this point the committee is familiar with the methodology of creating benchmarks by drawing 1 million simulated maps and evaluating them for partisan balance, competitiveness, and minority representation."

11/19/2021K. Bearden of Fulton County
"The redistricting process has had some serious flaws; a nonpartisan redistricting commission is needed. The GA legislature gave the public many opportunities to provide input, but we were forced to do that without any knowledge of the actual district lines. All but 3 of the hearings were in person preventing most people from participating. During the special session, the public had access to proposed maps only a few days or a few hours before a hearing making it very difficult to say much about the actual impact of the maps. There were guidelines developed by the legislature for redistricting, but unfortunately the guidelines do not account for the biggest driver of the process, partisan gerrymandering. Georgia still needs a nonpartisan commission to draw maps relieving the legislators of a conflict of interest by being in charge of drawing maps of their of their own districts."

11/19/2021B. Metts of Cobb County
"How exciting to be included in a district where someone actually cares about our Community, State and Country! Please allow the redistricting so that we will be represented by Marjorie Taylor Greene!"

11/19/2021J. Purify of Cobb County
I strongly object to the GA14 to include PowderSprings and Austell Georgia.

11/19/2021N. Porter of DeKalb County
"Good afternoon, I am writing about the proposed redistricting of Dunwoody into 2 parts. This does not make sense to me as the size of Dunwoody (around 50,000) is appropriate as it is in a single district. The concerns of this town is best represented by a single voice. Our US Supreme Court has written that wherever possible it is better to kept communities together. Please reconsider keeping our community as a single voting district. Best regards, Nancy Porter 2173 Foxboro Lane Dunwoody, GA 30360 404-556-6277 njporter33@gmail.com"

11/19/2021A. Rice of Fulton County
The blatant gerrymander of Georgia legislative districts is incredibly unethical and should be illegal. Republicans are distorting representation in our congressional delegation and in state districts. It’s ridiculous that Dawson county and Sandy Springs have common interests. Minority voters and Democrats are being disenfranchised all over this state. Shame on the Republican Party.

11/19/2021J. Thomas-Langston of Cobb County
I oppose being represented by Marjorie Taylor Green. I voted for Congressman David Scott. Marjorie Taylor Green does not represent the values of this community.

11/18/2021J. Gore of Gwinnett County
"It seems like most on here don't know or understand that the Republican party in Georgia has had a trifecta stronghold over the Governor's office, the Senate & the House for SEVENTEEN YEARS! The Republican party here also controls the Secretary of State & the Attorney General! In the Senate, it's 34-22 Repub-Dem. In the House of Reps it's 103-76 Repub-Dem. The new redistricting is absolutely gerrymandering and will still guarantee that Republicans stay in control another decade. I've lived in northern Gwinnett Co for over 20 years. Now I'll be voting in a district that comprises THIRTEEN northern counties that vote 80-20 Repub-Dem. So they decided to chop up Gwinnett and make it impossible for any Democrat to ever win in this new 9th district. Absolutely staggering. To all the Republicans on here angry about the redistricting in other counties, do your HW cause your party is still very much in power and these new maps guarantee it for many years to come."

11/18/2021A. Whaley of Cobb County
"I will not accept that Marjorie Taylor Greene's 14th Congressional district be extended to include Powder Springs and Austell! She does not represent this mine or my area's values! She is a cancer, and even though Rep Barry Loudermilk is a cancer too, I can deal with him, because he's somewhat reasonable. I didn't vote or choose Marjorie Taylor Greene, and now I'm going to be forced to be in her district! NO!!!!"

11/18/2021J. Palgon of Fulton County
WE THE PEOPLE OF GEORGIA ARE FED UP WITH REPUBLICAN POWER GRAB!!!

11/18/2021D. Ivey of Cobb County
"I recently looked at the new GOP gerrymander that dilutes and underrepresents minority voters. I would indeed be placed within U.S. Representative Barry Loudermilk's district. He does not represent my interests and values, nor should he ever be representing me."

11/18/2021D. Ivey of Cobb County
"I can't really tell from the proposed and blatantly gerrymandered congressional map where either my house or U.S. Representative David Scott, my congressman, would end up, but there is absolutely no reason why Cobb, Forsyth, and Dawson should be in the same district. I do NOT want to end up in Barry Loudermilk's district!!! This is why the Voting Rights Act should be strengthened!!! What's worse, the new House of Representatives and State Senate maps aren't even that fair, despite what legislative Republicans might say!!!"

11/18/2021T. Wade of Cobb County
Marjorie Taylor Greene does not represent the interests of the Powder Springs and Austell areas. I oppose any redistricting plans to place my community in her district.

11/18/2021A. Silverman of DeKalb County
"Fairness was evidently too difficult for the creation of Georgia House and Senate districts. There are no ""Competitive Districts"" at all, only Republican-leaning and Democratic-leaning districts. The Princeton Gerrymandering Project provided benchmarks for fairness that should have been heeded. Given the increase and change in population, PGP projected 9-22 Competitive Districts for the House and 1-7 for the Senate. The only transparency I noted in the process was the majority party's fixation on maintaining power. So much for the promises stated at the outset."

11/18/2021A. Mears of Cobb County
"Lucy McBath is my representative and I am happy to support her, as she has promoted issues and values I share. Adding the south half of Cherokee Co will not represent my neighbors and my area of Cobb. I am against the proposed change to my #32"

11/18/2021N. Maxwell of Cherokee County
This is nothing more than more political overreach. This should not be allowed.

11/18/2021T. Tibbitts of Douglas County
Do not approve this anti-democracy plan. Politicians cannot choose their voters. Keep Georgia a free state where voters choose their leaders.

11/18/2021J. DV of Cobb County
I do NOT want to be represented by Marjorie Taylor Green. She is an embarrassment to the USA and an embarrassment to GA. I will not accepted being redrawn and having her represent my community.

11/18/2021V. Waddell of Floyd County
Why is House 14 missing from the map but House Rep14 has written a new act to acquire a five member board of elections and registration and the voters/citizens of did not have the opportunity to vote on this issue?

11/18/2021M. Blackmon of DeKalb County
"As a long-time 80-year-old Georgia resident, I have been watching the news regarding the meetings of the two redistricting committees and the maps that you have drawn. Having participated in two of the public hearings you conducted back in the summer and a couple more starting November 3, I am very disappointed at how little your maps reflect what your constituents said to you around the state. You did not pay attention when small cities requested not to be split into multiple house and or senate districts. You bragged about keeping counties whole but never mentioned how you Gerrymandered most of the small cities."

11/18/2021K. Pothier of Fulton County
"Manipulating districts to secure seats for a party is an abomination. In a representative democracy, districts should correspond to geographical boundaries and the communities contained therein. Citizens have a constitutional right to representation and this direct manipulation violates that by pulling a large rural area into a suburban area with completely disparate needs, ensuring their vote is “diluted” so they end up with someone that doesn’t serve their interests"

11/18/2021S. Reed of Fannin County
"Please register my opposition to the current redistricting plan, it doesn’t accurate reflect the makeup and isn’t even veiled as fair and isn’t representative except with gerrymandering “lies” tactics. Don’t even believe I an fooled into believing you and will vote in the future against anyone who votes for it"

11/18/2021L. Mashburn of Cherokee County
"Notice: Do NOT split up Cherokee County! Notice to Agent is Notice to Principal and Notice to Principal is Notice to Agent Whereas, I being one of the People of the county of Cherokee, as defined by the Constitution of the State of Georgia, sui Juris, hereby serve you this public notice so you can provide due care; We The People of Cherokee County would like to remind you that you are there to serve us & preserve our rights & liberties. We have made it known that the redistricting map you’ve proposed, is UNACCEPTABLE. We demand proper representation of the People of Cherokee County by having at least 4 State Representatives & 1 Senator WITHIN Cherokee County lines. We do NOT want any portion of Cherokee County represented by anyone who lives outside our county, district 6 especially! Remember your oath of office. We the People will utilize our Constitutional rights to hold you accountable for maladministration & seek remedy if you fail to comply with the Will of the People."

11/18/2021D. Baderia of Forsyth County
"The move to add Forsyth and Dawson counties to GA-6 completely alters its character and clubs in a diverse urban electorate with a highly homogenous rural one. Compared to proposals for other districts, the extent and magnitude of this change is highest for GA-6. It is clearly designed to suppress the voices, votes and interests of the diverse electorate that currently comprises the district by electing a representative who will be beholden to the its rural constituents at their expense. Such tactics descend from a long line of anti-democratic approaches going all the way back to Jim-Crow which seek to use the cover of democratic institutions to actively undermine our democracy. They speak to our worst impulses and must be vociferously called out."

11/18/2021K. Lee of DeKalb County
"It is clearly ""voter shopping"" with the proposed Republican mapping for Congressional Districts. CD6's core has more in common with the City of Dunwoody than it does with Forsyth and other northern counties. Do not move the Dunwoody citizens out of the 6th."

11/18/2021L. Mullis of Fulton County
"It is clear, that this redistricting is intended to silence the voices of minority and more progressive communities, who have spoken out loud and clear in the past few elections. There can be no other reason for the future GA-6 to include rural areas, which are heavily White and have nothing in common with the vibrant, diverse communities of the current GA-6. I live in Sandy Springs and my concerns are significantly different from those of someone who resides in Dawson county. The Congressional map you've drawn, is meant to harm minority communities and also harms other residents by dividing communities of interest."

11/18/2021L. Higdon of Fulton County
"I currently live in the 6th Congressional district, and I’m appalled that the proposed map lumps Johns Creek (my city) in with Gwinnett County and then strings the 6th up through Dawson County. How can one representative cover metro Atlanta AND the rural northern parts of this proposed district. North Fulton has way more in common with Cobb and DeKalb. This is an obvious attempt to dilute a blue shift in voters of this area."

11/18/2021A. Dersnah of Fulton County
"The addition of Forsyth and Dawson Counties to District 6 brings in close to 280,000 people (source: 2020 Census) who are currently not part of and have never been part of this district. The target population of a district is slightly over 730,000. I think changing the district's ""roster"" by at least 38% is too much, and it does a disservice to everyone involved."

11/18/2021A. Sureka of Fulton County
"This redistricting is intended to silence the voices of minority communities. There can be no other reason for the future GA-6 to include rural areas, which are heavily White and have nothing in common with the diverse communities of this area. We will be convincing Democrats to vote in Republican primaries to vote out anyone who supports these efforts. We will redouble our efforts to defeat legislators who supports this in the General election. Fairness must be supreme."

11/18/2021V. Manson of DeKalb County
"Congressional District 6 concerns: The Republicans state that they want to maintain the central core of the districts and be responsive to the constituents. In Chairwoman Rich’s presentation of their map, she frequently cited what they had heard from voters during the Town Halls. She offered no evidence of support from the District 6 voters to justify this massive change. The current core of the district is 42% minority voting age population. The map would reduce this population to 33%, a reduction of 9%. No other district has as large a change. The Republican map seems to result in an abridgement of the right of minority voters in this district to elect representatives of their choice."

11/18/2021D. Sengupta of Fulton County
"It is clear, that this redistricting is intended to silence the voices of minority communities, who have spoken out loud and clear in the past few elections. There can be no other reason for the future GA-6 to include rural areas, which are heavily White and have nothing in common with the vibrant, diverse communities of the current GA-6. This power grab has the intention of minority rule written all over it. Clearly, the GOP doesn't have a platform, isn't interested in reaching out to voters or helping Georgians. All the GOP has done, is incite a violent insurrection, resort to fearmongering about Black and Brown communities and and now stealing our electoral power. The gerrymandering is so blatant, that none of you are able to defend it. You intent is to grab power like the Fascists you are. In that, you have been successful. In a 50-50 state, in a state that has consistently been moving towards Dems, the Congressional map you've drawn, is meant to harm minority communities."

11/18/2021M. Blackmon of Cherokee County
Do not split Cherokee into multiple congressional districts. I have zero interest in sharing representation with the folks in the 6th district.

11/18/2021A. Enjeti of Fulton County
"I am absolutely appalled by the degree of partisan gerrymandering Georgia Republicans are engaging in to redraw the congressional maps. The proposed 6th congressional district combines urban Fulton County with rural Dawson County. It makes a Democratic district a 15-point gain for Republicans. This new district is clearly a direct attack on Congresswoman Lucy McBath and especially disenfranchises the minority voters who currently reside there. The proposed 14th congressional map puts two majority Black Atlanta suburbs, Austell and Powder Springs, in the same district currently represented by conspiracy theorist and white supremacist, Congresswoman Marjorie Taylor Greene. These maps are racist, and Georgians will be stuck with them for 10 years. This backlash to electing Biden, Warnock, and Ossoff has been so cruel."

11/18/2021S. Calahan of Fulton County
"I don't believe the people have been clear enough or the redistricting decision makers just aren't listening. North Fulton (Roswell, Alpharetta, etc.) has nothing in common with the far flung parts of Forsyth County, much less Dawson county. This is a disgusting power grab splitting up the communities of interest of northern Atlanta into 4 different congressional districts so they lose representatives who will listen to their concerns. 11, 14, 6, and 9 should not all reach into metro Atlanta. Draw maps that will give people and there interests representation."

11/18/2021M. Shapiro of Fulton County
"Please keep communities of interest together when drawing the 6th district boundaries. The issues important to the voters of suburban North Fulton and East Cobb are NOT the same as those in exurban/rural Dawson, Cherokee and Forsyth counties."

11/18/2021S. Abrar of Cobb County
"There is no true, inclusive redistricting process without listening and working with those directly impacted by this process. I am shocked that legislators would even consider redrawing lines to put communities like my home or Powder Springs into the district of conspiracy theorist and hatemonger Rep Marjorie Taylor Greene. We are a diverse, welcoming community attracting new businesses and families to this growing town and we need representation by true leaders who share our values, not people who attack and spread hate. Furthermore as the fastest growing community in Cobb County, Powder Springs should not be split off from Cobb County."

11/18/2021M. Simpkins of Fulton County
I live in the diverse community of John’s Creek in North Fulton 6th district. Our community has little in common with Forsyth County which has minimal diversity and a sordid racial history. Attaching urban North Fulton to rural Forsyth pretty much assures that my vote will no longer count. But then isn’t that the objective of redrawing the map? Leave my vote alone!

11/18/2021J. Berkowitz of DeKalb County
"I’m not surprised at the power grab demonstrated in the redistributing maps. I’m saddened that the tactic is to disenfranchise people of color, and to rig a system so that minor views can keep power. Go back to the drawing board and draw fair maps."

11/18/2021S. Riddle of Cobb County
"While you are bragging about keeping most counties intact - an admirable goal when drawing new Districts - what is the justification for dividing Cobb County into FOUR Congressional Ditricts? It has been difficult enough when we have had THREE Districts. Plus you are moving a community that is predominately African American into an overwhelmingly White District - totally dismissing their voices - particularly given who the current congressional representative is, and I say that as a White Woman. As bad as the September map was, it was superior to this map."

11/18/2021T. S of Cobb County
Districts should be drawn fairly to be competitive and must reflect the diversity that GA is lucky to have. These proposed maps are nothing but a power grab and not drawn in good faith. Please adhere to the Princeton Gerrymandering project guidelines and stop disenfranchising voters. We deserve better.

11/18/2021M. Salpeter of Fulton County
"As a resident of the 6th District, I am extremely disappointed and upset to see the Republican's proposed map that now includes Dawson and Forsyth Counties and eliminates North Dekalb County as well as parts of North Fulton County from the 6th District. The proposed map creates a gerrymandered district that includes constituents without common interests. Citizens of Sandy Springs have no clear commonalities with citizens of Dawson and Forsyth. On the other hand, Sandy Springs and all of North Fulton share common interests with neighbors in Dekalb and Cobb. The proposed Republican map disenfranchises citizens living in the 6th District. The Census data does not require the major changes Republicans have proposed for CD 6. I support the Democrats' map that keeps North Dekalb in CD 6 and keeps all of North Fulton in the 6th District."

11/18/2021J. Figueroa of Cobb County
"Please don't redistrict west Cobb county. In no way, shape, or form does the population of this area match the rest of that proposed district. We would not be equally represented and that infringes on our democratic rights."

11/18/2021E. Shackelford of DeKalb County
"Why not have fair maps? This is a power grab. The proposed map gives Republicans a likely 9R/5D split with zero competitive seats. Our current make-up is 8R/6D. Why do you want to defeat the democratic process? We are watching, and we vote."

11/18/2021G. Houghton of Cherokee County
Do not split Cherokee County into 2 districts! Keep us as one!

11/18/2021B. Mapp of Oglethorpe County
Gerrymandering is wrong. The voters should have an opportunity to vote on this matter.

11/18/2021R. Spadoni of DeKalb County
I'd like to believe that regardless of political affiliation we all want equal and fair representation. Wheres the integrity with this proposal?

11/18/2021L. Sutphin of Fulton County
"Georgia deserves proportional representation, not gerrymandering to favor one party over another."

11/18/2021M. Bosserman of DeKalb County
This map does not reflect the current population of Georgia. It is designed to minimize the political will of black Georgians and citizens in metropolitan areas. While our Republican Legislature has had plenty of scope to improve the lot of rural Georgians they have not chosen to do so since they don't have to. This is an example of extreme gerrymandering. In concert with the truly wretched new voter suppression bill we can expect elections that bring us Jim Crow 21st Century.

11/18/2021A. Bralley of Fulton County
Blatant gerrymandering. Such a sad State for fair representation

11/18/2021J. Vargas of Fulton County
The proposed map for the new 6th district is ridiculous. North Fulton needs are NOT the same as Forsyth and Dawson. A single representative cannot possible represent completely different contstituents. This is gerrymandering at its finest guaranteeing republican seats. This should be illegal

11/18/2021J. Goodman of Fulton County
"With a nearly even split of Democrats and Republicans in the state, I find it baffling that the GOP would propose a map that so blatantly skews that representation. I understand the GOP is scared and this is nothing but a power grab by a desperate and shrinking group, but let's let Democracy work. Stop minimizing the impact of our people of color, draw districts that make sense, and represent common perspectives as the founder so clearly intended. Seven and Seven!!"

11/18/2021P. Sullivan of Chatham County
"I’m disgusted with this whole process. Maps have not been made available for a meeting for review, instead they’re being presented at the last minute. Maps are obviously gerrymandered based on the voting history of Georgia and seem to be specifically targeted to removing individuals from the Democratic Party. Maps are not competitive, and don’t get voters choice. I’ve compared the proposed maps to the benchmarks provided by the Princeton gerrymandering project in fair districts Georgia and they do not measure up. The process, and the maps, are flawed."

11/18/2021J. Hartel of Fulton County
A map that splits a precinct is a terrible map. A map that splits a school or a neighborhood is a terrible map. These maps do all of those things. They (House & Senate maps) take No consideration for communities of interest other than the GOP interest. A District in the shape of a snake is not a fairly drawn district. You Should & Can Do Better! I do not approve these maps!

11/18/2021M. Baron of Fulton County
"I live in CD6 and am very opposed to the latest map drawn for this district. The 2020 census shows that GA is more diverse than in 2010. Rather than reflecting that diversity, these maps pack communities of color into some districts while diluting their votes in others. District 6 is drawn so long and narrow and is obviously gerrymandered to disenfranchise Black voters and prevent Rep. Lucy McBath from keeping the seat. A clear violation of the Voting Rights Act."

11/18/2021C. Fuller of Cherokee County
Don't break up Cherokee County period. Who is responsible for trashing our conservative county. Let me know or I will research. Clark Fuller

11/18/2021N. Williams of Cherokee County
Keep Cherokee County in district 11. Don't give east Cherokee to District 6.

11/18/2021A. Lane of DeKalb County
"The proposed Congressional map is blatant gerrymandering. It would remove my county from CD6, and disrupts our relationship w our elected Congresswoman. Furthermore the lack of transparency (posting the maps only hours before the meetings) gives the public no time to review, reflect, or make plans to appear, etc. This is not ethical behavior and seeks to affect future elections. We see you and we don’t approve. Why not use the maps from the Princeton Gerrymandering Project? These maps are available for public inspection via these links: bit.ly/GAFairCongmap1 bit.ly/GAFairCongmap2 bit.ly/GAFairCongmap3 bit.ly/GAFairCongmap4 fair maps are indeed possible."

11/18/2021H. Smart of Athens-Clarke County
"Athens Clarke county is its own community with needs and values that don’t always align with our neighboring counties. For those that champion local control, folding ACC into the 10th districts strips us of our local representatives that can advocate on our local issues. ACC voters do not have conservative values as a whole and we will continue to push back and create challenges for politicians that strip us if our voice through unfair re-districting."

11/18/2021B. Perry of Glynn County
"Earlier this year, Princeton Gerrymandering Project created a citizen mapping corps by judging the results of a nationwide mapping contest. Their maps avoid partisanship better than any others under consideration and are the very best options for all. Citizens who demonstrated the best map-drawing skills joined the corps. Fair Districts GA challenged the corps to draw maps for Georgia’s congressional delegation. They produced 5 maps that meet or beat all the benchmarks: • 8R-6D partisan balance • 2-5 competitive districts • 5-6 minority-majority districts • 9-15 counties split, as good as or better than the committee and caucus-proposed maps. These maps are available for public inspection via these links: bit.ly/GAFairCongmap1 bit.ly/GAFairCongmap2 bit.ly/GAFairCongmap3 bit.ly/GAFairCongmap4 This demonstration proves that fair maps are indeed possible."

11/18/2021A. Meyer of Fulton County
"As a resident of the 6th District, I am fervently against the latest proposed map which extends the 6th district into Dawson county. This map unfairly hurts our fellow Georgians of color and rips from them their representation. It is shameful and it is very apparent what it aims to do to our neighbors. Indirectly, all Georgian are hurt by this map because of the negative publicity it will bring to Georgia."

11/18/2021D. O of Cherokee County
Lucy McBath shares none of my values. Don't want her liberal philosophies and spendthrift ways in East Cherokee. Keep her thieving hand out of my pocketbook. Stop the partisan gerrymandering that rewards corrupt greedy democrats. Keep communities of interest together.

11/18/2021B. Willis of Fulton County
ery disappointed in the blatant power grab and disregard for your constituents. Stop ignoring the voice and will of voters in this state.

11/18/2021E. Lichtenfeld of Cobb County
The proposed Congressional map does not recognize the needs and will of the people only the needs of the party in power. Following the Princeton Gerrymandering principles would provide FAIR BIPARTISAN maps!

11/18/2021C. Matheson of Cherokee County
"Keep cherokee county a single district (district 11), do not split! Eyes are on all of our elected officials now!"

11/18/2021P. Miner of Cherokee County
I am absolutely opposed to the proposed gerrymandering of Cherokee County. Please stop.

11/18/2021W. Phillips of Cherokee County
I am totally opposed to the proposed gerrymandering of Cherokee County.

11/18/2021N. S of Gwinnett County
"Please stop gerrymandering. You are trying to erase the votes of people of color. The constitution calls for free and fair elections. The redrawing of districts to heavily favor Republicans is anything but that. If you have to scheme to win, what does that say about your character and the fact that you are out of step with the majority of voters in this county, state and country?"

11/18/2021V. Hill-Fisher of Cobb County
"Under NO circumstances should the boundary lines be redrawn whats also known as ""red- lining"" for the self serving interests of political and socioeconomic influences, that does not serve the community inclusiveness . This is NOT comprehensive nor is it reflective of the Majority of Cobb county residents. I strongly oppose this idea and the ramifications that follow for the community in which I live for my family and I."

11/18/2021J. P of Fulton County
Do legislators even read these comments? The constituents of Georgia sure do. WE ARE FED UP WITH THE GERRYMANDERING!

11/18/2021C. Boender of DeKalb County
"District 6 has a ridiculous new outline to water down the votes of people of color, lumping together Metro Atlanta with rural areas, in order to drive out Lucy McBath. It's well beyond a partisan gerrymander; it's clearly racial. You can see it in some of the other changes, too, because GA is almost/maybe already majority minority and Republicans are scared."

11/18/2021B. Powers of DeKalb County
STOP THE GERRYMANDERING! Forcing right-wing nut jobs into Democrat leaning areas is nothing but a power grab by the gop. FOR SHAME!

11/18/2021J. P of Fulton County
Keep Cherokee and Forsyth Counties OUT of the Democratic 6th District!!!

11/18/2021J. Anderson of Cherokee County
I love the way some people still support communist democrats. (They also voted for the Marxist) Media propaganda can do wonders. For me? Keep Cherokee County RED and safe from ignorance. Leave it alone!!

11/17/2021J. P of Fulton County
What's it gonna take for Republicans NOT to rig the map?

11/17/2021J. P of Fulton County
"A 9-5 R delegation is not proportional. 9÷14 = 64.29% GA's 2020 results: 49.1% (R), 49.4%(D) Georgia is roughly 50-50 in party support. If you think that Republicans deserve 64.29% of Georgia's voice in the House of Representatives, you need to go back to 2nd grade and relearn fractions."

11/17/2021L. Mitchell of Fulton County
No no no to redistricting!

11/17/2021J. P of Fulton County
"KEEP NORTH FULTON BLUE. WE DO NOT WANT TO BE REPRESENTED BY A GREEDY, WHITE-NATIONALIST REPUBLICAN."

11/17/2021D. Woolsey of DeKalb County
"I hope for cute current maps to stay as similar as possible to the current maps. I feel connected to the other citizens in my current district from the state senate, house, and congressional district. I don’t want them to be changed outside of slight population adjustments. After viewing the census data myself I see that these new districts have not followed this desire. Many seats have been changed for partisan changes and not to keep communities together."

11/17/2021R. Lynch of Cherokee County
Keep Cherokee County in district 11. Don't give east Cherokee to District 6.

11/17/2021J. Rueckert of Cobb County
GERRYMANDERING!!! How in the He!! do we go from David Scott to Marjorie “IDIOT” Greene in Cobb County! This is bananas!!!!

11/17/2021D. O'Hare of Fulton County
"Very disappointed by the lack of fair district distribution. My district (the 6th) has clearly been changed dramatically because the GOP wants to boot out Rep. McBath. As a resident of Roswell, I am embarrassed by this power grab by the GOP; sadly I'm not surprised."

11/17/2021J. Donaghy of Cherokee County
Under no circumstances is Cherokee County to be redistricted. The proposed map is intentionally trying to weaken the vote and we will not stand for it. These subversive and undermining tactics will not be tolerated.

11/17/2021S. M of Fulton County
You can see this map is a hot mess of bias. District 6 in particular. Figure out how to be fair.

11/17/2021E. Wooden of DeKalb County
Very disappointed in the blatant power grab and disregard for your constituents. Stop diluting the voice of the people. Stop gerrymandering districts.

11/17/2021S. Hawk of DeKalb County
"As a Republican turned Libertarian turned Independent, I see the need for maps that accurately reflect GA's population. We are a 50/50 purple state. Maps that give Republicans a super-majority are gerrymandering. The GOP-drawn maps are *not* reflective of our purple population. The Dem-drawn maps are more fair & balanced. Do better, GOP!"

11/17/2021S. Hawk of DeKalb County
"As a Republican turned Libertarian turned Independent, I see the need for maps that accurately reflect GA's population. We are a 50/50 purple state. Maps that give Republicans a super-majority are gerrymandering. The GOP-drawn maps are *not* reflective of our purple population. The Dem-drawn maps are more fair & balanced. Do better, GOP!"

11/17/2021M. Weiselberg of DeKalb County
How the hell can you possibly justify giving Republicans 9 of 14 Congressional seats WHEN THEY COULDN'T EVEN WIN THE STATE IN NOVEMBER 2020 OR JANUARY 2021??????? Gerrymandering bastards. Cowards. Losers.

11/17/2021R. Safon of Fulton County
This is a disgrace--minimizing progressive areas to advantage the right. Gerrymandering!

11/17/2021T. Cappello of Cherokee County
Please do not split Cherokee county up!!! We are a strong county and need to stay as one!!!!! Keep the 11th district as is!!!!

11/17/2021K. Perry of Cherokee County
No district splitting. We are not willing to split and join the other district. Our votes count!

11/17/2021C. Gregory of Cherokee County
Keep our county in District 11. Keep our county strong. Do not divide us.

11/17/2021J. Archer of Cherokee County
Under NO circumstances is Cherokee County to be redistricted. The map that has been proposed is intentionally trying to weaken our strong RED vote and we will not stand for it! I am a FIRM NO to the proposed redistricting!

11/17/2021H. Haas of Bartow County
"It is disturbing that David Ralston, who is supposed to be fighting for Republican voters, is actually giving away one of our seats just to be vindictive against someone who is interested in election integrity. This cannot be allowed. We support Philip Singleton in Bartow County!"

11/17/2021K. P of DeKalb County
"This is the horrendous map possible. Republicans can’t win, so they cheat and claim the other side cheated. This the greatest injustice to People of color and shows how corrupt and morally bankrupt Republicans are."

11/17/2021M. Stombler of DeKalb County
I'm so disappointed looking at the maps. This is so unethical. Why do some legislators need to cheat to win. This gerrymandering is anti-democratic. Sickening.

11/17/2021W. Payne of Cobb County
"I have just looked at the most recent proposed map and I am very disappointed. I live in the 6th district and feel like we finally have good representation for middle class professional people like me. I feel that my area has way more in common with the rest of Cobb County rather than Forsyth and Dawson Counties. It looks like gerrymandering just might get us a MAGA idiot as a representative that is only concerned with ""stop the steal"" and QAnon rather than the needs or my district. I would prefer competitive, equally distributed districts that truly reflect the population growth of the state in the last decade."

11/17/2021S. Schneider of Fulton County
"Competitive districts are essential to democracy and a vital Georgia. Only when districts are competitive, including partisan competition, are office holders open to public input. As an engaged citizen, I want to give input about legislation or public issues via email or face to face. When a district is not competitive, only high powered stake holders are listened to, town hall events are non-existent and only high dollar events are held. Indifference of an office holder to public input undermines healthy, safe and thriving communities. I live in House Dist#6 and only recently has public input been welcomed."

11/17/2021A. Swygert of DeKalb County
"The Senate Redistricting Committee Chair seems to be confused by what “gerrymandering” means as he claims that their proposed maps aren’t gerrymandered. Gerrymandering is when one party purposely draws district lines to disadvantage the other. It is clear that all maps are gerrymandered as they unfairly benefit the Republican party in a 50/50 state. Racial gerrymandering is when districts are drawn to disadvantage people of color. All maps short-change GA’s growing minority population by not adding enough minority-majority districts. Sadly, “gerrymandering” is alive and well in GA in 2021. Republicans will no longer have bragging rights when these maps will be challenged in court."

11/17/2021D. Taggart of Fulton County
"I was on the livestream of our fellow citizens, including a HUGE contingent of self-described Republicans from Coweta County, Peachtree City, and Fayetteville passionately take the (Republican) Committee members to task for splitting up their communities, & for refusing to give citizens enough time to give their feedback. There was plenty of outrage to go around, for everyone in Metro ATL. Peachtree City, Dunwoody are being split up, Lawrenceville, the county seat of Gwinnett County will be in Hall County's district, & Buckhead will be mostly in 2 literally Salamander shaped districts that look like they locked jaws in a death grip from opposing directions, then someone stepped on them, flattened them. Who can possibly represent both Buckhead & SW Atlanta??(HD60) Even Chastain Park (HD53)has been split up at Lake Forrest Rd! These communities deserve their respective appropriate representation. I learned in school that gerrymandering was evil, it was the opposite of democracy. It is."

11/17/2021K. Lawler of Fulton County
"Fair Districts GA: Citizen-drawn maps for Congress We now have 5 maps drawn by experienced citizen map-drawers that are better than either of the proposed plans from the legislature. Earlier this year, Princeton Gerrymandering Project created a citizen mapping corps by judging the results of a nationwide mapping contest. Citizens who demonstrated the best map-drawing skills joined the corps. Fair Districts GA challenged the corps to draw maps for Georgia’s congressional delegation. They produced 5 maps that meet or beat all the benchmarks: • 8R-6D partisan balance • 2-5 competitive districts • 5-6 minority-majority districts • 9-15 counties split, as good as or better than the committee and caucus-proposed maps. These maps are available for public inspection via these links: bit.ly/GAFairCongmap1 bit.ly/GAFairCongmap2 bit.ly/GAFairCongmap3 bit.ly/GAFairCongmap4 This demonstration proves that fair maps are indeed possible."

11/17/2021R. Graham of Douglas County
"We are being harmed and defrauded and the felony below isn't being considered by you all? An organized crime by the DNC, Rinos, and Biden Regime using a bio wepon... Peter Daszak ""We need to increase public understanding of the need for medical counter measures such as a pan corona vaccine. A key driver is the media and the economics will follow the hype. We need to use that hype to our advantage to get to the real issues. Investors will respond if they see profit at the end of the process"" https://www.bitchute.com/video/tRrJ3gzmvMt8/"

11/17/2021C. Johnson of Cherokee County
I hope all of the Cherokee County Rhinos have enjoyed their time in office! What’s done in the dark is ALWAYS brought to the light! We see you!

11/17/2021C. Brown of Cherokee County
"As a resident of Cherokee, I have had to swallow the fact this body decided to the destroy Cherokee county with your irresponsible redistribution of our votes to other counties. Now I find it absolutely appalling that we maybe faced with a split congressional dstrict. I am strongly requesting that this not be done. Our county is a proud and one made of people with common interests and we wish to remain as ONE CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICT. Please let is with some dignity."

11/17/2021C. Johnsin of Cherokee County
"I CAN NOT believe what Mandi Ballinger, Brad Thomas, Bruce Thompson, Barry Loudermilk, Wes Cantrell, John Carson, Brandon Beech, and John Albers are allowing to happen to Cherokee County! We are watching! We will have candidates to run against you! Your time is up! You ALL WILL BE VOTED OUT! We know who Ralstons puppets are! WE SEE YOU AND YOU WILL BE EXPOSED FOR ALL TO SEE!"

11/17/2021D. Stull of Spalding County
First! Kandiss Taylor for Governor. Mack Miller for Lt. Governor and Herschel Walker for Senate. We will vote out all legislatures who didn’t fight for audits. Our votes were stolen by the communist democrats and we won’t stop until all RINOs are gone and those who participated in election fraud prosecuted. WE WONT STOP!!! 😡

11/17/2021M. Williams of Fulton County
"Throughout the counties it is obvious that is solely for gerrymandering. This is obviously illegal and solely for political gain-it is a de facto attempt to change the voting outcomes and lessen one group of voters’ vote for the gain of another voter’s political party. This has got to stop. Your job is to represent the people of your community and to continue to gerrymander the districts show that you as representatives to do not want to represent the will of the people. As servants to the people, you must represent the people, not diminish their voice and remove their demands."

11/17/2021R. Graham of Douglas County
"Do you count the dead voter for the commy movement to overthrow our rights; like you allow in the fraudulent election? Hitler would be so proud of you all in destroying humanity, taking our right to vote, killing people, spreading suffering, enslaving America, and helping the traitors like Abrams, Kemp, Raffesburger, Warknock, Ossoff and the lot. Who works for Soros? The man who literally helped the NAZIs and said something to the effect of... I can't look at what I do to people on a social aspect, I cant.... Frankly... If none of you are flipping tables and calling out these NAZIs then you all need to go... People are suffering and the suicide rate is up over 600%. People are being harmed by a human experiment injection for a virus that was released on purpose who was organized by the DAM WORLD ECONOMIC FORUM AROUND 2000. Who is standing up? Cowards, commys and traitors? Who among you is ethical? God sees you... We see you... You are all buying the hell you deserve to be sent to."

11/17/2021D. Biemiller of Cobb County
"What is being done with these (hundreds?) of concerns voiced in this portal ? Have they been even read? By whom? There have been no responses. This portal is clearly a fake pretense- to mollify us into thinking our concerns are being heard and acted upon. If our concerns in this portal are being read, how can we know this? Shame on those of you in power and desperately grasping to hold on to it."

11/17/2021D. Fisher of Gwinnett County
"As a Georgia citizen and voter for more than 20 years, I am dismayed that the secretive nature of the process continues as meetings are being held with very little notice, and the redistricting committees are not forthcoming about exactly which maps will be considered. This makes it impossible for the public to be meaningfully involved. Based on the proposed maps released by the Senate Leadership, Republican-leaning districts from 8 to 9, despite Georgia being a nearly 50-50 state. They have completely ignored the current partisan balance in our state. Additionally, the Republican proposed map has NO competitive districts, denying many Georgians the opportunity to choose their congressional representative."

11/16/2021P. WOODLEY of DeKalb County
"The proposed maps DO NOT REFLECT that fact that Georgia is basically a 50-50 state. That is not democracy! There are also too few competitive districts, denying many Georgians the opportunity to choose their congressional representative. Finally, the process has not been transparent as promised. Yes you ""accepted"" input from we the people but it does not appear to have been listened to or considered."

11/16/2021J. Sepela of Chatham County
"I am 100% with what J. Eckles commented. Why would anyone split up Windsor Forest when we do have such a cohesive neighborhood and have nothing in common with Tybee Island. If anything all of the Southside should be in District 165 and not split in two. PLEASE HEAR WHAT WE, THE PEOPLE OF WINDSOR FOREST/SOUTHSIDE ARE ASKING! We’re the ones who live here!!!"

11/16/2021J. Eckles of Chatham County
"Why is a cohesive neighborhood, such as Windsor Forest, get split between District 165 & 166? It looks terrible and does nothing to promote unity. District lines should follow common boundaries rather than arbitrary lines that favor one political party or the other. Please re-evaluate the district lines for 165 and 166. I have very little in common with someone living on Tybee Island and would much rather be included in a district with my neighbor."

11/15/2021K. Cavallaro of DeKalb County
"Honestly, I never thought I would see such rampant self-interest revealed in the redistricting process. Despite input from citizens for a transparent process, it was far from the open, thoughtful, reasonable process that is needed to reflect population growth and the political divisions in the state. The proposed maps divide communities in a way that clearly shows intent to obtain specific political goals rather than reflect the population. And finally, we the public, that is, we the PEOPLE, have not be given adequate opportunity to review and give our input into the maps."

11/15/2021L. Denzin of Cobb County
"As I watch the videos and from the redistricting committee meetings that have taken place during the Special Session, I am shocked by the total disregard many of the committee members have for the voice of the people. I sat in the meeting room on 11/4/21 while Vice Chair Bill Cowsert proudly held up a stack of postcard sent by fellow Georgians urging the committee to use fair, transparent, apolitical means for determining the new districts. Holding up the cards does not equate to listening and responding appropriately to the constituents. It was an act - THAT was transparent! Also, Chair Kennedy was very proud to announce how thousands of Georgians had submitted comments online and at the public hearings around the state. Again, acknowledging the will of the people is not translating to the maps they are drawing and rushing through for a vote. This is a farce. I suggest to these legislators that they watch just what the People of Georgia can do before the next census."

11/14/2021D. Gordon of DeKalb County
I am very disappointed and upset that the current redistributing map splits communities of color and minority racial groups to keep power and voting influence in white communities. Especially in a state which went to Joe Biden and two Democratic Senators. It’s a call back to Jim Crow laws. Please use an independently backed map or one that both Democrats and Republicans agree on. Otherwise it’s just another instance of white supremacy in our state’s problematic history.

11/14/2021N. Jemmott of Fulton County
"I am very concerned that the redistricting process continues to lack transparency. The committees have failed to respond to the hundreds of comments they have heard or received in the portal. Additionally, the Republican proposed congressional map ignores the current partisan balance in Georgia and increases the Republican-leaning districts from 8 to 9. Lastly, the Republican proposed congressional map denies many Georgians the opportunity to choose their congressional representative because it has no competitive districts."

11/14/2021A. Lee of Bacon County
"To whom it may concern, I was inquiring information concerning organization's, wealthy, and, or, individuals with technical knowledge, invading lower class person's life completely. Such as trying to act as ruler, God, master. If you do not comply, punishment follow's nothing from the judicial system, or meet's nothing of government standard's. Physic warfare, for those who are gifted. From what I've witnessed mind, technology, physical. I'm writing you because I am a survivor and have first hand knowledge. My tv's, vehicle's, phone's, and mind hacked! The government need's to take serious look into this. This is real threat to all person's who have no idea and it is spreading like a wild fire through the line's. I was tortured for two and a half year's by group's that didn't like what I stood for and seen that I had no asset's. Individual's that were seeking monetary gain, you have a murderer, what they do to a human physically. Imagine what their mind's consist of. Ashley D Lee"

11/14/2021A. Harwood of Fulton County
"This new map represents classic gerrymandering, a practice that we in Georgia should put behind us. It ignores the democratic principals of our Constitution and has been given a failing grade for fairness. Please do the right and moral thing and make redistricting bipartisan by creating an independent bipartisan commission to work on the redistricting map so that ALL Georgians can have an equal voice. Please vote NO on the new map, and please give Georgians a fair map."

11/14/2021S. Dattilo of Fayette County
I am opposed to the redistricting as currently proposed. The map shows Fayette county being split into 4 pieces and those pieces being combined with pieces of 4 other counties. And some of our cities are even being split in half - this is ridiculous- keep all of Fayette in one district! Do what is best for the party that elected you not what is best for the speaker!

11/13/2021R. Bruce of Cobb County
"Bonnie, I am confused. Gerrymandering is supposed to be the method used to eliminate troublesome people in the opposite party. Rep. Singleton has been an outstanding standard bearer for the Republican Party and well loved by his constitutes. Your suggested redistricting map does not just trim the edges or balance out the numbers for adjoining districts. A suspicious person would conceive of the possibility of malice. A suspicious person would conceive of political motives. Suspicious people might see reason to file a court challenge to the curious map as it stands. Avoiding such an open family feud in the Republican party would be preferred to airing the family's dirty laundry. I am asking that you reconsider this portion of the map. I believe it is well with in your power to do so. “live not by Lies” Thank you for your attention to this matter. Ralph Bruce"

11/13/2021T. Leslie of Fulton County
"As I celebrated my Birthday in October, I was reminded of the (representative), of this Nation. The movements of certain Political Parties seem, HELL BENT on dividing the citizens, property and unfair realigning GA. Where is the Honest (Man & Woman), that once yearn to SERVE! To the best of their ability without the need to Draw Lines in the DIRT in order to win a Political Office. How sad our Nation has become, where the focus is on (SELF), not those you've all made promises to. I miss Adult Representation-"

11/12/2021C. DRIVER of Houston County
The people of Georgia deserve a fair redistricting process. It saddens me that our representatives care more about saving their seats than saving electoral integrity. These maps are a strategic distortion by Republican lawmakers who are using the citizens of Georgia as pawns in their partisan ways once again. My recommendation is to use your political prowess for positive benefit of the constituents you represent.

11/12/2021C. Higgins of Coweta County
"Please do not disenfranchise my vote by dividing up any part of coweta county. Putting any part of Coweta into Fulton county , the most corrupt county in the state by Republicans behind closed doors reminds me on the Consent Decree negotiated by our Secretary of State last year that was done the same way. The Dems would NEVER divide any of their majority counties for any reason! The people of Coweta are saying No, No, No!!"

11/12/2021A. Woodd of Coweta County
Splitting Coweta County so much is ridiculous and making us part of Fulton county is even worse. There is absolutely no reason to make any portion of Coweta county part of Fulton county representation. This also gives Republicans less of a voice in our government because Fulton county votes democrat every time; Coweta is historically a Republican county. How exactly will a representative from a county that encompasses mostly Atlanta be of any benefit to the people or Coweta county? — they won’t!

11/12/2021G. Ashley of Clayton County
"I am absolutely disgusted by the maps. As chairman of the Clayton County Republican Party, even I have to admit that the Democrat Caucus drew better maps than the Committees. Thank you, Reps Singleton (R-71) and Byrd (R-20) for being a voice of reason among the masses. Shame on the Georgia General Assembly and the Committees that refuse to listen to the voters."

11/12/2021D. Nguyen of DeKalb County
Please keep Dunwoody in one district.

11/12/2021M. Jabaley of Columbia County
"Why would Ralston want to be vindictive in redistricting to anyone who wants to find the truth in the election? Georgians have demanded election integrity from their public servants” and it has fallen on deaf ears. Now, it appears the redistricting scheme is another way to hurt Georgians once again. Shameful and Sad. Very sad."

11/12/2021S. Offord of Fayette County
I am opposed to the redistricting as currently proposed. The map shows Fayette county being split into 4 pieces and those pieces being combined with pieces of 4 other counties. And some of our cities are even being split in half meaning 2 people will try to represent one city. How will that work ????

11/12/2021J. Larochelle of Coweta County
Just like to say no to the redistricting of Coweta country. Sincerely J. L.

11/11/2021H. Hallett of Fulton County
"I've just read through some of the comments and it disheartens me that so many voters are participating in the process, looking at maps, submitting comments, and expecting the democratic process to work. From the way this special session has been conducted, it doesn't look the people representing all of these voters and working in the same good faith. Rushed maps, deals made to protect majority power, party-line voting. It all stinks. I can't think that you all went into politics to deliver this type of representation to your constituents, but the system is set up (you all being in charge of drawing the maps) in such a way that you are not incentivized to work for the voters but for yourselves. This system must be reformed. I wish that you all were super-human and could resist the pull of party politics and keeping yourselves and your party in power, but you are proving that is not the case. Reform this process and stop putting yourselves in this impossible position."

11/11/2021L. Lasher of Fayette County
"As a Fayette County resident, I STRONGLY oppose splitting my county's voting power by diluting it amongst 4 other counties. It is extremely unfair for my county to have NO say in determining our future!!"

11/11/2021K. Garcia of Fayette County
"I 110% DO NOT agree with redistricting Fayette County or any other for that matter! My family and I moved here for the small town feel and because we have shared interests with our community. Splitting our county up to include votes of other counties that have nothing to do with our small town is illogical and preposterous! I assure you that abusing this use of power to serve a political agenda will guarantee you do not get re-elected in the long run. You have a responsibility to uphold the interests of your constituents, so do it!"

11/11/2021S. Chester of Cherokee County
Stop this nonsense! We the people do not approve of redistricting. It does not fairly represent the majority of the vote in Cherokee County. Represent us (the voters) and do better. Vote no to redistricting.

11/11/2021L. Moore of Cobb County
"Do Not Redistrict the voting boundaries, Stop politicking!! You were voted in by the people and can be voted out by the people, we are awake and watching for shenanigans, no Dominion machines, no mass mail-out ballots, the corruption is sickening."

11/11/2021P. Short of DeKalb County
"Districts should be drawn to represent communities, not give partisan advantage. Athens districts are drawn to diffuse the voices of UGA students, not represent their community. As a City of Dunwoody resident I am dismayed at proposed maps for our district. There is no reason to divide this municipality. It only serves to support partisan interests and not the interests of my community. Do better! We need independent redistricting commissions. Y’all have proven you do not take this responsibility seriously."

11/11/2021J. Aron of DeKalb County
"This is blatant gerrymandering designed to diminish the influence of voters of color. GA's population of people of color has increased, yet our districts are being redrawn to split us up and give more power to white Georgians? What? Georgians see through this and will stand against it for as long as it takes to restore voting rights and democratic representation to every citizen of our state."

11/11/2021M. Olson of Fayette County
Why are you splitting Fayette County into four districts where our voices become the minority in every one? Cities are being divided into multiple districts. This process needs some serious light shed in it and slowed down.

11/11/2021C. Martin of Fayette County
THIS HAS TO STOP!!!! What they heck are y’all thinking?!?! People move into these counties and district intentionally!!! And not you just going to move lines around?!? Stop it and take care of your people that elected you!! Get out of the politics of it and do what’s right!!!! Gerrymandering is never a good thing. Stop it!!

11/11/2021J. Osburn of Coweta County
There is no justifiable reason whatsoever to carve up Coweta County and lump us in with Fulton - you are blatantly redrawing these maps to change our elected representation in the future. Stop trying to destroy what’s left of the suburbs by making us guilty by association. Coweta is NOT Fulton! This is blatant gerrymandering and we vote NO!

11/11/2021S. Lanier of Ware County
I should like to see FAIR representation reflected in the re-drawing of Congressional Districts. PARTISAN redistricting is KILLING DEMOCRACY. Short term political gain will result in long term disaster. It’s like climate change: a little bit more profit now is NOT going to be enough to save you from the consequences.

11/11/2021S. Bristow of Coweta County
"Please slow the redistricting process down. Lawmakers are moving through it way to quickly. Georgians deserve a fair, inclusive and transparent process."

11/11/2021S. Brown of Fayette County
"WOW ! I'm tired of being nice about this. This will affect people for 10 years! People all over Georgia are mad about this, regardless of political affiliation, race, etc. Someone with a little common sense needs to get involved before you finalize this plan! You work for us, not the House leadership! If gut Fayette County and Coweta County, I know I'll be donating to candidates who run against you in YOUR next primary. With the current plan, I may lose my voice to control who sits in MY House District. But I'll still be able to help get someone better in yours. Primaries are a wonderful way of purging people who are following the wrong sector of the party. They say, ""Elections have consequences."" If you steal our vote, we can always try to take yours away from you too!"

11/11/2021N. Strickland of Coweta County
"After all we as families have suffered due to the CORONAVIRUS PANDEMIC, I think it is deplorable that those in elected office would cause more damage and headache by tearing communities and schools a part to serve personal political propaganda. Coweta County has nothing to do with Fulton County. There should be no redistricting between county lines. This is clear and obvious abuse of political position. I absolutely oppose this. I am reading comments from those within the Fulton County lines begging YOU to stop tearing the communities apart. Parents in our district do NOT want this. Parents in the other districts do NOT want this. Whatever your political propaganda is to redistrict it, you are not considering what is best for the children of these counties and you should feel ashamed of yourself."

11/11/2021D. Young of Fayette County
"I am against the redistricting plan for Fayette county. Carving our county up in chunks makes no sense and lumps us in with surrounding counties, which means Spaulding, Henry and other counties get to decide what happens here. NO!"

11/11/2021K. Detwiler of Fayette County
Splitting Fayette county into 4 districts is ridiculous. It really looks like you’re doing something underhanded when our population is small and now we’re totally carved up. Please don’t do this!

11/11/2021M. Ramos of Gwinnett County
The bills being sent through committee are rushed. Our voting districts deserve deliberate discussion and careful consideration. What is happening currently is clearly not either of those things. This should not come to a vote today.

11/11/2021A. Swygert of DeKalb County
"When a committee votes on a bill less than 24 hours after allowing public testimony, it’s clear that the intent of public testimony wasn’t to actually listen to the public. It was to pretend to listen to the public. And when the GOP House leadership won’t allow a vote on the Democrats’ proposal, which works better for all of those that testified at the Committee hearing, it’s clear that this process is purely a partisan power grab. Shame on the GA GOP."

11/11/2021J. Shelton of Fayette County
The districts should represent a community with shared interests stop playing games for your political ends.

11/11/2021N. Haas of Bartow County
"The proposed redistricting changes that abnormally extend the Fulton Co. district south into a large chunk of Coweta Co. where Singleton and his family live is at best short sighted and at worst punitive to representative Singleton. I don't believe in coincidences. Therefore, I ask that this retribution for differing ideas be corrected."

11/11/2021E. Smith of Coweta County
There is no justifiable reason whatsoever to carve up Coweta County and lump us in with Fulton - you are blatantly redrawing these maps to change our elected representation in the future. Stop trying to destroy what’s left of the suburbs by making us guilty by association. Coweta is NOT Fulton.

11/11/2021C. Hudson of Coweta County
Please do not approve. The current districts. I live in Coweta County and the proposed map divides our county and will not allow for fair representation. Please keep our community together.

11/11/2021C. Rasberry of DeKalb County
"I am writing today as a 5-year Dunwoody resident to ask that you keep our Dunwoody committee in a single House district. Dunwoody is small enough to be within a single district, and as my fellow Dunwoody neighbors have mentioned, we truly are a close-knit community. In our businesses, churches, schools, and parks, people from all over Dunwoody work together, worship together, learn together, and play together, sharing many common values and goals. We would benefit from representation that can speak for all of us, as is currently the case. We respectfully ask that you find a way to keep our community in a single district as we have been for years by either adjusting your map or, if it is easier, adopting the democrat-drawn map. Thank you."

11/11/2021C. Abbey of Coweta County
"I understand that the Georgia House has sent the GOP proposed house redistricting plan to the Senate, only a few days after the maps came to light. Why not take the time to consider significant input from the public? Especially since we will have to live with the results for 10 years. What a shame that conservative northern Coweta was split off and absorbed into two Fulton County districts (65 & 67). It is not just Rep. Singleton's district which has been affected. Why Coweta County, with a 150,000 population, needs to be carved up into five districts is mystifying. This gerrymandering is HEINOUS. We should have no more than three house districts! And that is exactly what the Democrat proposal included! Please vote NO to the GOP proposal unless it is modified to correct the issues with Coweta."

11/11/2021W. Couch of Coweta County
Vote “NO” to Northern parts of Coweta being redistricted to South Fulton. We do not want to be a part of that

11/11/2021B. Wilson of Coweta County
Do not redistrict northern Coweta County into South Fulton. I am absolutely opposed!!

11/11/2021N. Howell of Coweta County
"Our community of interest in Northern Coweta will be no longer if this ""Georgiamandering"" happens. It's wrong on so many levels and disappointing that we the voters found out about this a little too late.. We want to have a voice - Change your mind and VOTE NO!!!"

11/11/2021N. Howell of Coweta County
"Our community of interest in Northern Coweta will be no longer if this ""Georgiamandering"" happens. It's wrong on so many levels and disappointing that we the voters found out about this a little too late.. We want to have a voice - Change your mind and VOTE NO!!!"

11/11/2021T. Deavers of Cobb County
"Please vote NO to redistricting. Remember the people that voted to put you in office, and don't pull the rug out from under them. They deserve to have a voice."

11/11/2021B. Broich of Coweta County
We are not in favor of redistricting Coweta County. Do not change our county’s voice

11/11/2021M. McKasty of Coweta County
Stop the shenanigans. If we wanted to live in Fulton County we would have moved there .

11/11/2021C. Wilson-McKasty of Coweta County
C. Wilson-McKasty of Coweta County Do not redistrict north Coweta into south Fulton. It is wrong to silence our voices. This redistricting is not in the best interest of our community.

11/11/2021K. Stowe of Coweta County
Please do not allow northern Coweta County to be included in South Fulton voting lines. This would create a situation where our voices will not be heard. Please do not silence to create your political agenda.

11/11/2021J. Janas of Coweta County
I have lived in coweta county for 52 years. We vote in the politicians to respresent “We the people”. “We” are not being represented at all. We are being used and traded so that our votes will be dissolved in a democratic county. Why would anyone live in Coweta and vote Fulton? It’s absurd. There is obviously a narrative here to manipulate the votes to appease the politicians. I feel betrayed and I’m disgusted in my representatives for supporting this sneaky agenda

11/11/2021K. Miles of Coweta County
Do not redistrict north Coweta into south Fulton. It's wrong to silence our voices. We are two very different areas.

11/11/2021C. Battles of Fulton County
"Comments to House Redistricting Committee 11/9/2021 Madame Chair and Committee: Thank you for allowing us to make public comment this morning before you consider the proposed House district maps. As I mentioned yesterday, we did not have a chance to analyze the new maps or update our comments between the time we received the new maps and the committee started so we appreciate this extra time. Starting off, we are disappointed that this committee has the resources and means to create more majority-minority districts so that the Georgia Assembly can reflect the diversity of our state as clearly defined by the results of the 2020 census. Rather than taking the opportunity to empower voters of color in Georgia, it feels like you are deliberately cracking and packing districts to take away that power. One of the things we noticed is that Johns Creek precincts in North Fulton and Southeast Forsyth County have been reshuffled to put district 50 entirely within North Fulton and District 25"

11/11/2021C. Battles of Fulton County
"Comments to House Redistricting Committee 11/9/2021 Madame Chair and Committee: Thank you for allowing us to make public comment this morning before you consider the proposed House district maps. As I mentioned yesterday, we did not have a chance to analyze the new maps or update our comments between the time we received the new maps and the committee started so we appreciate this extra time. Starting off, we are disappointed that this committee has the resources and means to create more majority-minority districts so that the Georgia Assembly can reflect the diversity of our state as clearly defined by the results of the 2020 census. Rather than taking the opportunity to empower voters of color in Georgia, it feels like you are deliberately cracking and packing districts to take away that power. One of the things we noticed is that Johns Creek precincts in North Fulton and Southeast Forsyth County have been reshuffled to put district 50 entirely within North Fulton and District 25"

11/11/2021D. Stanley of Fayette County
"Keep Fayette Co whole, do not dilute our votes by chopping up Fayette into 4 small pieces to add onto 4 larger districts. Don't take our votes away!"

11/11/2021A. Richardson of Coweta County
Do not redistrict Coweta County we will lose our voice. DO NOT SILENCE US!

11/11/2021J. Calabro of Coweta County
Do not redistrict Coweta County we will lose our voice. DO NOT SILENCE US!

11/11/2021S. Holzer of Forsyth County
Please do not redistrict our area of south Forsyth off Old Alpharetta Rd. We are conservative & have voted Republican for years & want to be represented by Republicans. We want to stay in Todd & Greg’s districts.

11/10/2021J. Woodard of Coweta County
"Hey Georgia, stop trying to be Illinois!! They are going to have to change the term to Georgia-mandering after this one!!"

11/10/2021J. Woodard of Coweta County
Coweta isn’t Fulton for a reason….this is simply an attempt to broaden Democrat controlled districts…..leave Coweta ALONE!

11/10/2021J. Kegley of Fayette County
Don’t redistrict!!!!

11/10/2021J. Kegley of Fayette County
Dilutes and cancels Fayette voters. This is political posturing.

11/10/2021C. Garcia of DeKalb County
I do not favor the redistricting plan. For a process not to be advantageous to either party a no-partisan committee needs to head it.

11/10/2021J. McCoy of DeKalb County
"I am appalled at the rushed process and a Senate map that fails to reflect the growth in minority population in GA, and fails to reflect the even partisan split in the state shown in the 2020 elections. I hope the General Assembly map and Congressional will be more fair, more competitive, and more representative of the actual population of Georgia."

11/10/2021W. Reed of Fayette County
Do not redistrict the voting boundaries. They are working fine for our representation. Leave it as it and stop the politicking!!!

11/10/2021B. Gibbs of DeKalb County
"I totally echo the following comments that were previously submitted: Gerrymandering is manipulating the boundaries of an electoral constituency to favor one party or class. Unfortunately, the Georgia redistricting map meets this definition. District lines should be drawn fairly and with a transparent process. It's time for an independent commission."

11/10/2021M. Chenoweth of DeKalb County
"DO NOT eliminate any GOP MAGA districts. Period - full stop. As a citizen of GA i will NOT tolerate a Republican In Name Only effort to stifle or push out of office Conservative representatives who support eliminating Dominion machines, ending mass-mail in ballots, or who supports investigating the MOST corrupt election in GA history. Names have been taken - and anyone redrawing maps to eliminate those seats WILL be primaried out of office, and investigated with the full power of We The People! You work for us, AT OUR PLEASURE. Misbehave and YOU WILL be removed from office!"

11/10/2021A. Biancardi of Cherokee County
Please vote NO on redistricting for Cherokee County and all other conservative counties. Our family moved from NY to escape Democrat policies and ways of thinking. We chose to move to a RED county and state. Please respect our conservative values and beliefs.

11/10/2021C. Henson of Coweta County
"Please reconsider the unfortunate redistricting map that has been presented. I live in Northern Coweta County and one of the reasons I recently moved here was to get away from a county with liberal representation. The population of Coweta is very conservative, yet you want us to move into a district with Fulton County, which is a predominantly democratic area. By doing so, you are stopping the voice of the people and instead putting Northern Coweta County in a district where they will neither care nor listen to our concerns and interests. Please do not allow this to happen. We don't need further turmoil in the state. Thank you."

11/10/2021J. Rosenfelt of DeKalb County
"Dunwoody is a very close knit, cohesive community. We have been in the same House District for more than a decade. Our population is still small enough to be kept together. Please keep us together as a community of interest. Thank you!"

11/10/2021C. Martin of Fayette County
Fayette County is such a small county and I can't even comprehend how you would even consider splitting it into four districts! I have been a citizen of Fayette County for 26 years and this redistricting will totally dilute our representation. I certainly this doesn't pass.

11/10/2021B. Levy of DeKalb County
"I have been a Dunwoody resident for 33 years. Dunwoody is a close-knit community with similar interests that should be kept together in one district. We have never had more than one House Representative. There is no reason to split us up since our population is well under the ideal size of a House district. For reference, Dunwoody is about 52,000 people and an ideal House District size for this round of redistricting is around 59,000). The Democratic Caucus map keeps Dunwoody together. Therefore, I ask you to either make changes to the committee map to keep Dunwoody together or approve the Democratic Caucus map. Respectfully submitted."

11/10/2021K. Carroll of Fayette County
"It is painfully clear what is going on here. Why else would Ralston , who has the ability to prevent this , not stop this redistricting? We are no longer republican if this happens. Too many underhanded things going on."

11/10/2021B. Hopkins of DeKalb County
"Gerrymandering is manipulating the boundaries of an electoral constituency to favor one party or class. Unfortunately, the Georgia redistricting map meets this definition. District lines should be drawn fairly and with a transparent process. It's time for an independent commission."

11/10/2021P. Wilder of Fayette County
Fayette County is a small county and it is unbelievable that you would split it in four districts! I have been a citizen of Peachtree City for 36 years and this redistricting will totally dilute our representation. Please reconsider this decision.

11/10/2021S. Brown of Fayette County
"I spoke to on Monday. I object to you splitting Peachtree City between THREE HOUSE DISTRICTS, Fayetteville and Fayette County being split into FOUR HOUSE DISTRICTS, and Coweta being ""gutted"" into 5 districts. Other cities complained too. Your plan is horrible for every race, creed, political party and special interest group. We are not the only ones complaining. The population of Fayette County is just under 120,000. You could divide the county into two House Districts with a ""zigzag"" line to equalize whatever racial, ethnic or other criteria, with Peachtree City intact in one district, Fayetteville intact in the other. Tyrone and Brooks can be intact. Just two House Districts in the county! WHY GUT FAYETTE COUNTY? WHY GUT COWETA COUNTY? Why gut any of the other cities that complained on Monday? Isn't keeping cities intact YOUR priority? I'M SURE THERE ARE WAYS TO DO IT AND FOLLOW ALL YOUR PRIORITIES. YOU NEED TO FIND A BETTER PLAN FOR FAYETTE, COWETA and the others."

11/10/2021T. Stephenson of Bartow County
"If you continue forward with redisricting Bartow to make my representative Marjorie Taylor Green I will never,EVER, vote REPUBLICAN AGAIN"

11/10/2021K. Miller of Forsyth County
"We have lived in Forsyth County for over 30 years. Our little pocket of south Forsyth, old Alpharetta Road between 400 and 141, is still rural in character. We are zoned agricultural residential and politically, we’re mostly conservative. We are dismayed to see that your proposed redistributing will carve out our little corner of south Forsyth and move it from our Forsyth representation (District 25 and 27) and lump us in with north Fulton County. We live in Forsyth. We do business in Forsyth. Our medical teams are in Forsyth. PLEASE don’t deprive us of our Forsyth representation!!! Let us remain in Todd Jones’ and Greg Dolezal’s districts. Please."

11/10/2021E. Koons of Fayette County
"I have been a resident of Fayette County since 1972. I am against the redistricting of Fayette County into four minority parts of larger districts outside of Fayette County (South Fulton, Coweta, Henry, Spalding) based on population. This achieves nothing other than to weaken/dilute the voice of Fayette County voters."

11/10/2021E. Clymer of DeKalb County
"Please slow down the process for approving house and senate maps. The public has not had time to review, understand, and comment on the maps that are actually being voted on. We want to make sure the maps are fair meaning they better represent the diversity of Georgia voters."

11/10/2021C. Sandstrom of Fulton County
"This is gerrymandering, and it is illegal. Unfortunately, political manipulation isn't. Redistricting should not be used for retribution, by gaming while the ball is in one party’s possession. That only breeds more Us vs Them mentality that creates more discord and distrust, while nothing gets done in the best interest of the people. Voters can see, even in spite of the bread and circus timing of this undertaking, hurrying through while Georgians celebrate the World Series. The public has not been allowed sufficient time and discussion for meaningful input. Please vote no on these maps. Instead, insist that our representatives change the redistricting process, creating one that requires and values real transparency, equitable voice, and includes non-partisan representation. For government to work, voters need to trust their representatives and believe that their voices will be heard. This does not do that."

11/10/2021A. Hughes of DeKalb County
"I think that the public needs more time to study the map. The one I have seen was viewed by the Princeton Gerrymandering group (non-partisan) and they gave it an F for fairness. GA is nearly 50-50 partisan split, but this map will result in a 33-23 split with only 1 competitive county. THIS IS NOT A FAIR DISTRIBUTION!"

11/10/2021J. Gilmore of Fayette County
We do not see any merit in the proposal to split up our county. Fayette county knows what we want for ourselves and do not need surrounding counties input to make our choices for us.

11/10/2021M. Spence of Forsyth County
"Another comment, I just realized that Todd Jones will no longer represent me and that I will be moved to Angelika Kaushe's District. For a person that has voted Conservative her whole life, this is a slap in the face. This is a terrible move by those that are supposed to represent ""we the people."""

11/10/2021D. Fisher of Gwinnett County
"I live in the City of Peachtree Corners, a city that currently is represented by a single Representative, recognizing our community of interest. Under your new map, 5 precincts, including the one that I live in, are being cut off from the rest of my city and tacked on to a District that sits in squarely in Fulton County. I know that one of the principles of your map drawing was to respect County and city lines. I am asking that you find a way to return the 5 Peachtree Corners precincts to sit with the rest of our city so that our city can have a single, focused voice as it is a strong community with unique concerns."

11/10/2021S. Huckaby of Fayette County
I have been a Fayette County resident for over 40 years. There is no reason to divide Fayette County into 4 districts. The majority of the populations will be outside of Fayette County which will dilute the votes of our people. You were elected as our representatives. The redistricting should reflect the will of the people.

11/10/2021M. Spence of Forsyth County
"I am opposed to the redistricting of Forsyth County. Sen. Dolezal currently represents me and with the redistricting Michelle Au will now represent me. I will have no Republican Representation in the GA Senate, or on a national level since Bourdeaux and Warnock are current officeholders. Conservative Forsyth is being liberalized by Gwinnett and North Fulton, it doesn't seem fair and could hurt Republicans running for office in the long run."

11/10/2021M. Franklin of Fayette County
"Please do not redistrict Fayette County. Ir makes no sense to have residents outside Fayette County voting on issues that only concern those within our County. If your only goal is to dilute the voting pattern in our county, then you do not deserve to serve in your position. You must serve the residents that elected you, otherwise you won’t be serving when future elections come around. I strongly encourage you to vote against this redistricting recommendation."

11/10/2021R. Knowles of Fayette County
I have lived in Fayette County since 1997. I strongly disagree with the new redistricting for Fayette County. It will dilute our votes and create other issues. Thanks

11/10/2021M. Boyens of DeKalb County
"I object to the drawing or redistricting maps that blatantly ignore fair representation for the increasingly diverse population of the state. I also object to the speed of approving both the senate and house maps, leaving inadequate time for public review, understanding and comment. The non partisan Princeton review rates your maps a failure of objectivity and fairness. Of course, that is what the country has come to expect from Republican control of anything."

11/10/2021C. Kegley of Fayette County
I have been a Fayette County resident for over 40 years. There is no reason to divide Fayette County into 4 districts. The majority of the populations will be outside of Fayette County which will dilute the votes of our people. You were elected as our representatives. the redistricting should reflect the will of the people.

11/10/2021S. Maguire of DeKalb County
"This redistricting effort is clearly an effort to water down certain individuals' votes. Any effort to change districts should be based upon the following: compactness; contiguity; equal population; preservation of existing political communities; partisan fairness; and racial fairness. Please behave in an honorable fashion and respect each individual's right to have his/her vote counted equally and ensure that any redistricting is done in a fair and equitable manner. BTW, not that it should matter, but for additional context, I am a middle-aged Christian Caucasian who votes in every election."

11/10/2021K. Rexhausen of Jasper County
"Raised in Georgia by a true Atlantan born a Grady. I have lived in various counties including Gwinnett. The redistricting should reflect the will of the people. It is clear, the will of the people has been spoken. Stop this redistricting."

11/10/2021N. Murphy of Coweta County
"The proposed redistricting of Coweta County is not in the best interest of the county or the people it will effect. I did not moved here 30 years just to be moved back to Fulton County. You were elected as representatives, for we the people and we DONOT want any part of redistricting to South Fulton."

11/10/2021C. Morgan of DeKalb County
"I have been a Dunwoody resident for 33 years. Dunwoody is a close-knit community with similar interests that should be kept together in one district. We have never had more than one House Representative. There is no reason to split us up since our population is well under the ideal size of a House district. For reference, Dunwoody is about 52,000 people and an ideal House District size for this round of redistricting is around 59,000). The Democratic Caucus map keeps Dunwoody together. Therefore, I ask you to either make changes to the committee map to keep Dunwoody together or approve the Democratic Caucus map. Respectfully submitted."

11/10/2021R. Morgan of DeKalb County
"I have been a Dunwoody resident for 33 years. Dunwoody is a close-knit community with similar interests that should be kept together in one district. We have never had more than one House Representative. There is no reason to split us up since our population is well under the ideal size of a House district. For reference, Dunwoody is about 52,000 people and an ideal House District size for this round of redistricting is around 59,000). The Democratic Caucus map keeps Dunwoody together. Therefore, I ask you to either make changes to the committee map to keep Dunwoody together or approve the Democratic Caucus map. Respectfully submitted."

11/10/2021D. Wilson of Coweta County
"Please VOTE NO on the redistricting. Coweta county is a conservative county. Coweta County representation does not need to be in Fulton County. We need to be represented by someone who lives in Coweta County. I do not approve the current version of the house redistricting map! I am a resident of Coweta County, and I do not approve of the way the committee has carved up Coweta and Fayette counties. The districts now give too much weight to Atlanta interests, and will result in the interests of long time residents of North Central Georgia being swallowed up in big city politics! We have NOTHING in common with Fulton County, as anyone who has visited the small towns and surrounding countryside in Fayette and Coweta counties can plainly observe. The map, as-drawn, in no way will represent my interests as a small town Georgian. Please, do not do this. Thank you."

11/10/2021A. Matkovich of Coweta County
"The proposed redistricting in Coweta and Fayette counties does not represent the best interests of the people of these counties. As our elected representatives, you should do what is best for the people of these areas. We want to maintain our current districts. Don’t play politics with our districts."

11/10/2021D. Dehnel of Peach County
im very concerned as to why we would agree to going from 103 rep areas to 97??? it seems as if we conservatives are continually giving more ground to the progressive left!! please stop!!

11/10/2021T. Merritt of Oconee County
"I have been born and raised in Georgia. I have lived in various counties including Gwinnett. The redistricting should reflect the will of the people. It is clear, the will of the people has been spoken. Stop this redistricting."

11/10/2021T. Merritt of Oconee County
"I have been born and raised in Georgia. I have lived in various counties including Gwinnett. The redistricting should reflect the will of the people. It is clear, the will of the people has been spoken. Stop this redistricting."

11/10/2021M. Cox of Madison County
I am opposed to the current redistributing maps as drawn and submitted. It appears to be Gerry meandered to force out a Republican who rightly opposed the voting machines used And appears to be retribution.

11/10/2021S. Kudro of Cherokee County
"To clarify, my previous comment refers to the plan to redistrict parts of Fayette and Coweta counties represented by Republican Philip Singleton. I am opposed to the redistricting of this area for the reasons stated in my previous comment--it will essentially force out a Republican and ensure that the seat goes to a Democrat."

11/10/2021A. Volle of Fayette County
"I strongly oppose this redistricting. Most of us have moved here from far and wide because of it being smaller county. This action would dilute our voices and needs to be brought to a general election, which will reveal a majority voting against it"

11/10/2021S. Kudro of Cherokee County
"I am strongly opposed to this redistricting. The redistricting is not only an abuse of the power of the speaker, it's destructive to the aims of the Republican Party in Georgia because it almost surely simply hands at least one currently Republican seat to the Democrats, probably more."

11/10/2021J. Searcy of Cherokee County
The new redistricting is an overreach of power and does not directly reflect the needs and our community as a whole. Please don't fix something that clearly isn't broken.

11/10/2021D. Bryant of Fayette County
Leave Fayette County in its current district. I am life long residence of Fayette County. My family and I specifically object to any actions that may lead to or require redistricting. Let me remind you that you are an official whose responsibility is to represent the position of your constitutes and I am one.

11/10/2021J. Greenberg of DeKalb County
"Please slow down this process so that the public has time to read, understand, and comment on these redistricting maps."

11/10/2021L. Ostapower of Coweta County
I am highly opposed to the county redistricting that is currently in the works. This is a blatant overreach in power.

11/10/2021A. Payne of Gwinnett County
I strongly object to the obvious attempt at gerrymandering HD105. Hog Mountain is not of interest in this district nor representative of historical boundaries.

11/10/2021K. Lawler of Fulton County
"(3/3) Both the committee and caucus maps lack competitive districts. The committee map has only 1, while the caucus map has only 3. The benchmark indicates that up to 7 are possible. The reason that the committee map receives a grade of F is that the partisan lean is clearly outside the benchmark and it only has 1 competitive district. The caucus map gets an A because it is well within the benchmark and has more competition. Finally, Sen. Cowsert asked a question about how Princeton deals with county splits. The maps in the benchmark are not allowed to exceed the number of split counties in the existing map, 37. The idea is to not make split counties any worse in the new maps."

11/10/2021K. Lawler of Fulton County
"(2/3) Looking deeper within this range, 88% of the maps have 1-3 more districts for Republicans. The map proposed by the committee projects a 5-district advantage for Republicans. This is outside the benchmark range. In fact 99% of the million maps have fewer Republican districts. Imagine a proposed map that is 27R-28D, or +1 district advantage for Democrats. The committee would no doubt consider that an outlier. The committee’s map at +5R is as far outside the benchmark range as a +1 Democrat map would be. Contrast this with the map proposed by the Democratic caucus. It has a +3 advantage for Republicans. It is well within the 98% range of the benchmark."

11/10/2021K. Lawler of Fulton County
"(1/3) This is to clarify the meaning of the benchmarks provided by Princeton Gerrymandering Project and Fair Districts GA. Benchmarks are created by drawing 1 million simulated maps that comply with redistricting criteria but without any political intent. The purpose of the benchmarks is to discover the natural political preferences of Georgia. The benchmarks use political data from the 2018 Governor, 2020 Presidential, and 1 2021 Senate runoff elections. These statewide elections show that Georgia is a swing state; statewide elections are close to 50-50. But that doesn’t mean that district maps should be split evenly, because of the clustering of Democrats and Republicans. The benchmark for State Senate reveals that the natural distribution of districts within 1 million maps should be 24-28 districts for Democrats and 28-32 districts for Republicans. Thus, Republicans appear to have a natural advantage of 0-4 districts because 98% of the million maps fall within this range."

11/10/2021K. Gonzalez of Fayette County
"I want to express my strong disagreement with this redistribution plans for Fayette county. I am so disappointed at this committee, for even considering it, and for the apparent secrecy and rush job to get this done. I ask, does your neighbor tells you how to cut your grass, or chooses the color you must paint your home, so in what world do non-residents make decisions for the residents of a county...! This only make sense if the primary goal is to dilute my vote, try to silence me, well please, do not allow it, because this one will not be a proud moment when you look back 10 years from now. Sincerely, Kenneth Gonzalez"

11/10/2021S. Coleman of Gwinnett County
Dear Representative Rich I strongly disagree with your redistricting Map Showing Hog Mountain in HD105 hog Mountain has no interest in HD105 Your district should represent you demographically by a certain percent Sir.

11/10/2021K. Self of Fayette County
Please vote no on restricting. Our votes do not need to be diluted

11/10/2021M. Ball of Fayette County
VOTE NO TO REDISTRICTING FAYETTE COUNTY! Our ideas do not align the counties you want to redistrict our county with. Vote NO!!!

11/10/2021B. Wood of DeKalb County
True representation reflects the voices and will of the residents. Redistricting to exert control of votes limits all voices and the privilege to vote and be represented. Let us not lose this right and freedom.

11/10/2021K. Self of Fayette County
Please vote no on restricting. Stop going against your constituents! Your voters will remember this. Keep Fayette County a Republican stronghold

11/10/2021R. Brennison of Fayette County
My husband and I are against the redistricting of Fayette County. We want the representation for the county to come from the county.

11/10/2021S. Clymer of Gwinnett County
"Dear Representative Rich, I am very familiar with the current HD 105 and I hardly recognize the proposed change. You are my HD 97 representative and your recent newsletter stated that District Maps must “consider traditional principles of redistricting such as ensuring communities of interest are represented.” Hog Mountain in HD105? No! Grayson should stay as part of the community of interest!"

11/10/2021M. Froehlich of Coweta County
Please vote NO on the redistricting. Coweta county is a conservative county. Coweta County representation does not need to be in Fulton County. We need to be represented by someone who lives in Coweta County.

11/10/2021R. Henley of Cherokee County
"Dear Representative, I do not favor the redistricting plan for Cherokee County. Under this new plan, the lines for Rep Phillip’s district will reflect a 70-30% Democrat majority. This redistricting scheme does not accurately represent our community. The district lines must be drawn to accurately reflect the community of Cherokee County which is 80-20% Republican. You have the power to correct this injustice that goes against the will of the people. As you see daily, people are rising up to support elected officials who speak on behalf of their communities, and flipping seats of those who do not. We hope to be able to endorse you in the future rather than seek your replacement. A Concerned Cherokee County Resident"

11/10/2021A. Branco of Cobb County
"Dear Rep. Bonnie Rich, I do not favor the redistricting plan for Cherokee County. Under this new plan, the lines for Rep Phillip’s district will reflect a 70-30% Democrat majority. This redistricting scheme does not accurately represent our community. The district lines must be drawn to accurately reflect the community of Cherokee County which is 80-20% Republican. You have the power to correct this injustice that goes against the will of the people. As you see daily, people are rising up to support elected officials who speak on behalf of their communities, and flipping seats of those who do not. We hope to be able to endorse you in the future rather than seek your replacement."

11/10/2021A. Branco of Cobb County
"Dear Rep. Bonnie Rich, I do not favor the redistricting plan for Cherokee County. Under this new plan, the lines for Rep Phillip’s district will reflect a 70-30% Democrat majority. This redistricting scheme does not accurately represent our community. The district lines must be drawn to accurately reflect the community of Cherokee County which is 80-20% Republican. You have the power to correct this injustice that goes against the will of the people. As you see daily, people are rising up to support elected officials who speak on behalf of their communities, and flipping seats of those who do not. We hope to be able to endorse you in the future rather than seek your replacement."

11/10/2021R. Cook of Fayette County
If what I'm hearing is true about a vendetta about a pastor's sexual abuse case to redistrict so that fayette County votes will no longer count is just as bad. Leave the citizens of fayette County out of any personal issues. We have our own issues to deal with. Disgraceful at the least for both the crime and the redistricting.

11/10/2021M. Hunnicutt of Fayette County
"Not happy with redistributing proposal. It will dilute Fayette residents votes. Why should Fulton, Henry, Coweta and whoever, represent me? I purposely chose not to live in these other counties, particularly Fulton and Henry for a reason. Their vision for Ga is not mine and under this proposal, my voice will not get heard. Leave Fayette alone!!!!"

11/9/2021M. Bennett of DeKalb County
"How can you have a redistricting process that is fair when it is being decided solely by the majority party? If you were confident about this process you would have set up a committee that is either non partisan or equally split amongst Democrats and Republicans. You took the opportunity to make decisions while the entire city came together to support our home town team on their major victory, I mean who does that? The one thing we can agree on is celebrating the Braves and you took advantage of us coming together to create more laws to divide us."

11/9/2021C. Gilley of Fayette County
I strongly disagree with the new redistricting for Fayette County. It will dilute our votes. Please listen to your constituents and stop this now.

11/9/2021P. Storey of Coweta County
"I disagree with this proposal, it appears someone is trying to make sure my vote won’t count. Highly disappointed in our elected officials who seem not to care about their constituents."

11/9/2021S. Wilson of Fayette County
"I do not approve the current version of the house redistricting map! I am a resident of Fayette County, and I do not approve of the way the committee has carved up Coweta and Fayette counties. The districts now give too much weight to Atlanta interests, and will result in the interests of long time residents of North Central Georgia being swallowed up in big city politics! We have NOTHING in common with Fulton County, as anyone who has visited the small towns and surrounding countryside in Fayette and Coweta counties can plainly observe. The map, as-drawn, in no way will represent my interests as a small town Georgian. Please, do not do this. Thank you."

11/9/2021R. Butler of Paulding County
"I do not agree with the redistricting plan for Cherokee County because it does not represent the citizens that reside there. Changing district lines for reasons other than for the benefit of the people that live there is unacceptable. We vote for people that will represent our interests, not dictate to us."

11/9/2021K. Swindall of Fulton County
"I do not agree with the redistricting plan for the state of Georgia as it currently is presented. As an example, under this new plan, the lines for Rep Phillip’s district will change from a 80-20% Republican majority to a 70-30% Democrat majority. It is imperative that the district lines be drawn to accurately reflect the community of Cherokee County, which is 80-20% Republican. This is an injustice that is contrary to the will of the majority of the people in this area and can be easily corrected by drawing the lines correctly. We, the people, are rising up to support elected officials who vote in accordance with the beliefs of their constituents. We also work diligently to find people to run against those who do not. We are not only concerned with Cherokee County, but with State House, Senate and Congressional districts throughout the state. Thank you for your public service and for your work in assuring that elections in Georgia will be run in a fair manner for its citizens."

11/9/2021M. Farr of Fulton County
"I do not favor the redistricting plan for Cherokee County. Under this new plan, the lines for Rep Phillip’s district will reflect a 70-30% Democrat majority. This redistricting scheme does not accurately represent our community. The district lines must be drawn to accurately reflect the community of Cherokee County which is 80-20% Republican. You have the power to correct this injustice that goes against the will of the people. As you see daily, people are rising up to support elected officials who speak on behalf of their communities, and flipping seats of those who do not. We hope to be able to endorse you in the future rather than seek your replacement."

11/9/2021S. Wood of Gwinnett County
I oppose the maps as currently drawn particularly changes in HD 105 since Hog Mt is not a community of interest.

11/9/2021M. Incata of Cobb County
"David Ralston, you ARE handing over Philip Singleton's district to Democrats because he stood up to you! You are willing to hurt Georgians because of your vendetta? And is it also true that you have the power to step in and exert power over the Parole board that let a child pornography felon go free 990 years before his parole, but won't lift a finger? Are you insane or just so arrogant that you have forgotten who put you in power? You should certainly be ashamed. I oppose your redistricting plan. Do better for the Republicans you serve."

11/9/2021K. Geer of Cherokee County
"Please reconsider the proposed redistricting plan for Cherokee County in which the lines for Rep Phillip’s district will reflect a 70-30% Democrat majority. This does not accurately represent our community. The district lines must be drawn to accurately reflect the community of Cherokee County which is 80-20% Republican. You have the power to correct this injustice that goes against the will of the people. As you see daily, people are rising up to support elected officials who speak on behalf of their communities, and flipping seats of those who do not. We hope to be able to endorse you in the future rather than seek your replacement."

11/9/2021L. Stinson of DeKalb County
"I have lived in Dunwoody for 13 years. I do not agree with the current redistricting map of HD79 as it is currently proposed because it undermines community that we have worked hard to create in the decade or so that we have been a City and in the same house district. Dunwoody is a very close knit, cohesive community. We still have few enough constituents here to be kept together in the same HD. It does not seem helpful to the taxpaying constituents or to the City at large, DeKalb, or metro areas to move us to a new district. It also does not seem customary or reasonable to do so, considering the above stated information. Please keep us together as a community of interest. Thank you for your time and for supporting the voices in Dunwoody and DeKalb."

11/9/2021K. G of Coweta County
"As a resident of this district, I am absolutely livid over this. Districting us into a 80% Democrat controlled district silences the voices of these voters. Singleton is a great rep. As a registered Independent for 30+ years, I voted a straight red ticket this year for the first time ever. My vote was earned by the Republican Party, which is what I require. If this redistricting occurs, I will simply not vote again. I will be taxed without representation. Republicans control GA Congress, SOS, Governor, Lt. Gov, and AG. Why are you giving any districts to the SOCIALISTS!? Disgraceful. Would Democrats give you districts? No they would not. They’re playing smash mouth and you’re playing footsies."

11/9/2021W. Mullins of Fulton County
"Dear Representative- I'm taking the time today to write to you that I do not favor the redistricting plan for Cherokee County. Under this new plan, the lines for Rep Phillip’s district will reflect a 70-30% Democrat majority which is excessive. This redistricting scheme does not accurately represent our community. The district lines must be drawn to accurately reflect the community of Cherokee County which is 80-20% Republican. You have the power to correct this injustice that goes against the will of the people. As you see daily, people are rising up to support elected officials who speak on behalf of their communities, and flipping seats of those who do not. We hope to be able to endorse you in the future rather than seek your replacement. Thank you!"

11/9/2021K. Muldowney of Fulton County
"I do not support the redistricting of district 71. It is clearly retribution for Rep. Phillips support of a forensic audit of the 2020 election results. Why are we so scared of performing an audit? A corporation that produces 500 billion in GDP, as dose the state of Georgia, is subject to formal audits annually. The majority of voters do NOT Trust the 2020 election. Do what you were elected to do support the voters and prove our system is sound."

11/9/2021T. Wilson of Forsyth County
"David Ralston, Is it true that you are handing over Philip Singleton's district to Democrats because he stood up to you? You are willing to hurt Georgians because of your vendetta? And is it also true that you have the power to step in and exert power over the Parole board that let a child pornography felon go free 990 years before his parole, but won't lift a finger? Are you insane or just so arrogant that you have forgotten who put you in power? You should certainly be ashamed. I oppose your redistricting plan. Do better for the Republicans you serve."

11/9/2021A. Green of Coweta County
"I do not approve of the redistricting layout of Coweta and Fayette counties. Having lived in Douglas, Fulton, Cobb, and now Coweta counties, I have a pretty good idea of what makes each unique, good qualities and bad. Forcing a governmental merge of representation from Coweta and Fulton counties is a clear misrepresentation of the majorities of people in both locations. STOP this manipulation and let the voters have an accurate voice for their beliefs and interests. OR be replaced."

11/9/2021K. Agbebiyi of Fulton County
"My name is K Agbebiyi MSW and I live in Midtown Atlanta. I am the Georgia Director of Policy and Movement Building at URGE: Unite for Reproductive and Gender Equity. URGE builds power and sustains a young people’s movement for reproductive justice by centering the leadership of young people of color who are women, queer, trans, nonbinary, and people of low-income. In Georgia, and other states across the South and Midwest, URGE organizes our communities, provides a political home for young people, advocates for meaningful policy change, and shifts culture, working in states where the challenges and opportunities are greatest. I’m writing in opposition of the proposed redistricted maps. Not only do the maps not accurately represent the diversity of our state, and the growing minority populations, the process has been swept through with minimal opportunities for public feedback and approval. It is imperative that the young people that URGE organizes with (who are Black, Latinx, LGBTQIA+,"

11/9/2021M. Sarkisian of Cherokee County
"I'm 100% opposed to the redistricting plan for Cherokee County. Under this new plan, the lines for Rep Phillip’s district will reflect a 70-30% Democrat majority. This redistricting gamesmanship does not accurately represent our community and everyone knows it. The district lines must be drawn to accurately reflect the community of Cherokee County which is 80-20% Republican. You have the power to correct this injustice that goes against the will of the people. As you see daily, people are rising up to support elected officials who speak on behalf of their communities, and flipping seats of those who do not. We hope to be able to endorse you in the future rather than seek your replacement."

11/9/2021H. Klatt of Cherokee County
I am NOT in favor of the redistricting of Cherokee County. This redistricting scheme does not accurately represent our community. The district lines must be drawn to accurately reflect the community of Cherokee County which is 80-20% Republican. Your jobs are to serve we the people! Do you job or find one enjoy doing more. Quit playing people against people!

11/9/2021M. R of Fulton County
"Why are you taking vindictive action towards current representatives and trying to draw their constituents away from their representative? Voters didn't ask you to do this. This behavior is malicious, obvious, and illogical. Redraw HD71 as it stands today, instead of flipping it for your corrupt political interests."

11/9/2021M. Isbell of Fulton County
"My children attend Cherokee County schools and I want to express my concerns about ""redistricting"" Cherokee County. There is no business, community or civic purpose for this, it appears to be politically motivated and punitive toward Rep Phillips to ""flip"" the seat for a political party. We should NEVER allow our elected officials to use political maneuvering for the purpose of power, you are elected to serve the community and constituents so that each individual is represented and their inalienable rights are preserved. Please do not use redistricting as a strategy to silence and divide. You were elected for a reason and by using your elected position judiciously and responsibly, you establish a solid record so that you can be re-elected. If not, you should plan to be replaced. Thank you for listening to my concerns."

11/9/2021R. Quillian of Fayette County
"PLEASE do NOT approve this redistricting of Fayette Co. Our needs and concerns vary greatly from those of surrounding counties. That is one reason I moved here. Do not allow David Ralston to negate my vote and harm my county. We have NOTHING in common with Fulton, Henry, Spalding or Coweta. This is nothing but a cheap power play and I want no part of it. STOP THIS CRAZINESS!!!"

11/9/2021K. Hines of Fulton County
"I am not in favor of the redistricting plan for Cherokee County. Under this new plan, the lines for Rep Phillip’s district will reflect a 70-30% Democrat majority. This redistricting scheme does not accurately represent our community. You have the power to correct this injustice that goes against the will of the people. As you see daily, people are rising up to support elected officials who speak on behalf of their communities, and flipping seats of those who do not. We hope to be able to endorse you in the future rather than seek your replacement."

11/9/2021A. Ellis of Coweta County
"Do not approve the current version of the house redistricting map! I am a long time resident of Coweta County, and I do not approve of the way the committee has carved up Coweta and Fayette counties."

11/9/2021P. Wiseman of Walton County
Here is what seems to be the problem for all legislators. Ralston is buying you off. So we are going to be sure Ralston has no money from big donors to buy you off with! We the people should be the only voice in your ear. Drop mic!!

11/9/2021J. Christ of Fayette County
"Do not approve the current version of the house redistricting map! I am a long time resident of Fayette County, and I do not approve of the way the committee has carved up Coweta and Fayette counties. The districts now give too much weight to Atlanta interests, and will result in the interests of long time residents of North Central Georgia being swallowed up in big city politics! We have NOTHING in common with Fulton County, as anyone who has visited the small towns and surrounding countryside in Fayette and Coweta counties can plainly observe. The map as-drawn IN NO WAY will represent my interests as a small town Georgian."

11/9/2021W. Gula of Fulton County
"Please stop the unfair redistricting of Georgia House Representation Phillip Singleton House District in Coweta County 73. I have lived in Fulton County for 28 years, and I am a strong supporter of House Representative Phillip Singleton. Phillip is dedicated to election integrity in Georgia’s elections. He is a brilliant representative and represents all Georgia voters working to ensure their vote counts and is not nullified by an illegal vote. Georgia voters need this reassurance since so many voting irregularities occurred in 2020. This is a HUGE confidence issue of tens of thousands of Georgia voters and a full forensic audit will build trust. House Speaker David Ralston is attempting to unfairly redistrict Rep Singleton out of his seat. The new redistricting moves the Republican from District 73 that has an 80-20% Republican majority to District 67 that has a 70 -30% Democrat majority. Please address this issue and stop this vindictive retaliatory action by David Ralston."

11/9/2021L. Ellis of Coweta County
Vehemently AGAINST redistricting of Coweta and Fayetteville counties as currently proposed. Please vote against District 67 and let Coweta County residents have local representation.

11/9/2021W. Neal of Fayette County
"I am appalled that Fayette County is being carved up into four different districts, none of which include a majority of Fayette County citizens. While i realize that no redistricting map is going to be perfect, this proposal would in effect give our county no real representation. Please reconsider!"

11/9/2021S. Hobgood of Muscogee County
Do not redistrict Coweta and Fayetteville counties as currently proposed. Please vote against District 67 and let Coweta County residents have local representation.

11/9/2021J. Barnard of Fayette County
Transparency in government is the goal so that citizens understand what is going on. Recommend that the committee align Fayette County alone rather than including parts of 2 or more other counties. Political bias for the purposes/good of a particular party is wrong. For the good of the people not a party.

11/9/2021K. Langford of DeKalb County
"As a 7.5 year resident of Dunwoody I have had the opportunity to take part in our city’s growth as a vibrant community. Please keep us whole, don’t split us. With just one House District we will continue to forge alliances that are in the best interests of all members of our community. Thank you."

11/9/2021D. Spransy of DeKalb County
"The clearly gerrymandered district proposals in DeKalb county do not make any sense. Communities are split up across the board, and people who live just a few miles from one another going east and west may be separated by an entirely different district. Meanwhile, many people who live many miles apart in north and south DeKalb end up in the same district. Additionally, redistricting should be led by a non-partisan independent body, not whichever party happens to be in power at the time in the state legislature. These districts are clearly drawn for partisan advantage, and it is shameful."

11/9/2021J. Schulman of DeKalb County
"I have been a Dunwoody resident for the last 13 years. Dunwoody is a close-knit community with similar interests that should be kept together in one district. We have never had more than one House Representative and there is no reason to split us up since our population is well under the ideal size of a House district (for reference, Dunwoody is about 52,000 people and an ideal House District size for this round of redistricting is around 59,000). I would request that you either make changes to the committee map or approve the Democrats’ map that keeps community together."

11/9/2021A. Birdsong of DeKalb County
"Redistricting maps should keep communities together. Districts should match closely with city and county borders, and even keep school districts together when possible. Districts should be as compact as possible. Districts should be fair to all population groups and not dilute votes of historically excluded groups. Districts should be competitive and allow voters to choose their leaders. Districts should not be gerrymandered. The current proposed redistricting maps are very gerrymandered and very biased, they do not keep cities and counties together, and are obviously drawn to favor one group over another."

11/9/2021P. Olson of DeKalb County
The proposed Republican map is clearly gerrymandering to obtain advantages in a majority of districts. The state is watching. This won’t be forgotten.

11/9/2021M. Greenwald of DeKalb County
Why is Dunwoody being split? This move does not serve our community and seems to be blatantly political. Redistrictricting is intended to adjust for population changes. The city of Dunwoody could and should remain as an intact House District. We will not forget what is being done.

11/9/2021D. Campbell of Fayette County
What a blatant act of retribution! Gerrymandering to dilute our vote. Fayette County representation should reflect the interests of Fayette County! Keep your hands off our vote! We are watching!

11/9/2021S. Henley of Miller County
"House Speaker's retribution against Philip Singleton for joining a lawsuit to correct the illegal elections that have been carried out in past elections by attempting to redistrict Rep. Singleton out of his seat is appalling and unethical. You, Bonnie Rich, as chairman of the redistricting effort have power to correct this injustice that goes against the will of the people. May I remind you and your colleagues you are a servant of the people of Georgia. I insist that the lines be redrawn more fairly. 1Thess 5:15 See that none render evil for evil unto any man; but ever follow that which is good, both among yourselves, and to all men. Prov 13:20 HE THAT WALKETH WITH WISE MEN SHALL BE WISE: BUT A COMPANION OF FOOLS SHALL BE DESTROYED."

11/9/2021M. Bussey of DeKalb County
"Redistricting should be handled by an independent, nonpartisan agency - always. The current Republican proposals are designed to suppress the power of some voters and enhance that of their current supporters. This is simply wrong, and wrong-headed. Times and voters change. By not having this process resolved by an independent agency the Republicans are begging Democrats to respond in a similar anti-democratic fashion when they are in control. This is not what democracy, and one-vote-one-person are about."

11/9/2021R. Cobb of Coweta County
"The proposed division of 30,000 north Coweta County residents into 2 majority-south-Fulton-County districts is a complete travesty and should not stand. This fast-growing area will be left with no voice and, in essence, no representation in state issues for the next 10+ years. Republicans in charge, do the right thing and stop your political petiness. Do what's right for the people!"

11/9/2021R. D of Fulton County
"I would like to echo and amplify this comment contributed by another citizen: “When a party loses an election, as Republicans did in both Senate races [and multiple local seats across the state] this past year, it is a signal to examine the direction and tone the party has taken that lost many voters. Instead this redistricting is a desperate attempt to ‘game’ the system and has obviously bypassed the processes for public comment and the principles of fairness. Why not instead invest your efforts in bolstering rather than undermining representative democracy?” Please stop efforts to retain power unfairly, and focus instead on actual platforms that Georgia voters actually support. Thank you."

11/9/2021R. D of Fulton County
"I would like to echo and amplify this comment submitted by a fellow citizen: “If Democrats have the time and ability to submit their maps weeks out before ‘due date’ for review, analysis and public feedback, anything submitted by Republicans should be subject to the same. To those who submitted last minute: Your job as a representative is to fairly--and transparently--serve the people.” I do not believe the people are being fairly or transparently served by the Republicans’ contributions to this process. Thank you."

11/9/2021H. Allgood of Stephens County
"Please do the right thing and draw the lines fairly!! To punish the Rep that we’re doing the right thing in calling for fixing the 2020 election!! We will never win another election if the lines are not done fairly!! Thanks, Harriett Allgood"

11/9/2021R. D of Fulton County
I add to my previous comment – please vote no on the Republican-proposed maps.

11/9/2021R. D of Fulton County
"I want Georgia to set a high standard and to be an example to other states for ensuring fairly drawn and competitive districts which provide voters the best chance to elect people who are representative of their district’s needs and desires. Carving cities and communities so that residents have multiple representatives dilutes their voices and benefit to their district. The public has not been provided sufficient opportunity for review and input; the input that has been given appears to be disregarded. Finally, the GOP-offered maps reduce competitiveness in multiple districts, blatantly biasing outcomes to Republican candidates. This is gerrymandering and it is wrong. I urge maps that promote community preservation and simplification of representation; I support measures that ensure fair representation. What I’ve seen from this committee so far respects neither principle. I ask that you listen to the public and honor our input. Thank you."

11/9/2021E. Judd of Cherokee County
Cherokee County NEEDS four (4) house district seats and one (1) senator seat in the county within our county border. This is imperative to Cherokee County residents!

11/9/2021D. Strasburg of Coweta County
"I urge you not to redistrict north Coweta county as proposed. Other than taking away north Coweta's district 71's representation, it is just plain wrong and appears to be motivated by political retribution rather than resident's interest."

11/9/2021K. Weinhardt of Fayette County
"What you have essentially done is completely dilute the voters of Fayette and Coweta counties on this proposed house map. Districts 65, 67, 68, and 69 all run north to south from Fayette or Coweta county. Each proposed district runs northward into Fulton County pulling in a chunk of a much more heavily populated geographic area. You have neutralized the will and the interests of the voters in Fayette and Coweta Counties. You have also dissected the district of Philip Singleton's district. I find it strange that you chose to destroy the district of one of the voices in the state legislature that called for a FULL INVESTIGATION of the 2020 presidential election in Georgia. Let's be clear. Hundreds of thousands of Georgia voters want a full investigation of the 2020 presidential election. Now you are proposing to eliminate Singleton's district and chop his county up into 5 pieces. The question GA voters want to know who it is that you serve."

11/9/2021D. Waldroup of Fulton County
The redistricting for the Speaker to retaliate against Singleton is an abomination; the Speaker himself is something of an abomination as well. He needs to go.

11/9/2021L. King of Gwinnett County
"Don't redistrict to retaliate against Philip Singleton. I vote Republican, but I will not vote for corruption. Politics are being more exposed than ever. We see what you're doing, good or bad. You need to do what's right. You need to fix the GA parole board. You need to put the pedophile back in prison. 7 years does not equate to life in prison. If you're redistricting to keep the majority and not addressing these important issues, you don't deserve to be in politics."

11/9/2021T. Collins of Cherokee County
"This is an absolute outrage! Even though I am not a citizen of Coweta county, this affects every Georgian. This is being done as political retaliation, and is unacceptable in a Democratic Republic. Georgia is successful because of Republican leadership. Where is that leadership now?"

11/9/2021L. Townsend of DeKalb County
My family has been a resident of Dunwoody for over 12 years. We are best represented as a community/city together. Please reconsider the voting district to avoid splitting our city.

11/9/2021W. Kessler of Fayette County
I do not support the redistricting of Fayette and Coweta County. This redistricting proposal will mute the voices of the citizens of Fayette and Coweta County. I will support any measure to remove David Ralston as Speaker should this redistricting be finalized.

11/9/2021A. Zupancic of DeKalb County
"I moved to Atlanta in 1965 when I was two years old. I've lived in north Georgia's Murray County, metro Atlanta's Fulton, Cobb, and Dekalb Counties, middle Georgia's Bibb County, and south Georgia's Glynn County. I currently live in Dunwoody, where I lived from 1975-1981 (graduating from Dunwoody High School) and where I returned to live with my husband in 2014. Dunwoody is a diverse but closely-knit community with similar interests that should be kept together in one district. We have never had more than one House Representative and there is no reason to split the community - our population is well under the ideal size of a House district (Dunwoody's population is about 52,000 people, well within the ideal House District size for this round of redistricting). I respectfully ask that changes to the committee map be made to keep our community together (or alternatively, the map proposed by the Democrats be adopted). Thank you for your consideration of this request."

11/9/2021W. Huff of Fayette County
Please do not gerrymander District 71 to co-mingle with Southern Fulton County. It makes no sense. Please leave District 71 as is.

11/9/2021M. Pichardo of DeKalb County
"I have been a resident of Dunwoody for over 15 years,I respectfully ask that you do not divide our city. All Georgia citizens desire a representative that knows and understands their community's issues. I ask again that you do not move forward with the action of dividing our community."

11/9/2021H. Sheth of DeKalb County
"As a Dunwoody resident and small business owner, I respectfully encourage you to reconsider the proposed map of splitting Dunwoody into two separate districts. Our community is small and very close, and we are truly best represented if we have one state representative and one state senator. Our population is small enough to keep us altogether and it just makes sense from a logistical and community involvement perspective. Regardless of our political affiliations, I have no doubt that Dunwoody is united in support for our community."

11/9/2021K. Chipman of Coweta County
Why is anyone considering redistricting across County lines? The Republican Reapportionment Map takes two Coweta County voting districts across County Lines. One district will actually cross 3 County lines. How will the community’s best interest be served by a Representative who is not a member of that community. Their focus will be on their community. Coweta County has vastly different needs from Fulton County. I am asking you all to vote NO on the Republican Reapportionment Map.

11/9/2021J. Cope of DeKalb County
"I am a Dunwoody resident for 10 years. Please reconsider the redistricting of Dunwoody into two districts. Dunwoody is a close-knit community with similar interests that should be kept together in one district. We have never had more than one House Representative and there is no reason to split us up since our population is well under the ideal size of a House district. The Democratic Caucus map keeps Dunwoody together. Therefore, please consider either making changes to the committee map or approve the Democrats’ map."

11/9/2021T. Crow of Coweta County
I am against moving Northern Coweta County in Fulton County. I moved here 16 years ago because I like how the community is run. I do not want to be apart of Fulton County. Please consider this when voting on the proposed redistricting of Northern Coweta County.

11/9/2021J. Ziffer of DeKalb County
"Please reconsider splitting Dunwoody into two districts. While growing, Dunwoody is a small community that is working cohesively to enhance the community for existing and new residents. Breaking Dunwoody into two districts will impact the community feeling. As a 15-year Dunwoody resident and a 20+ year resident of DeKalb, I'm asking you to please reconsider this decision. Thank you."

11/9/2021S. Fraser-McConnell of Fayette County
"There is no reason to be dividing up Fayette county and putting pieces of it with other counties. Counties should remain intact unless they divide a county in pieces due to size, but then it should not be lumped in with neighboring counties. We vote, pay taxes, and pass rules, regulations, & laws for our counties and should be a single voting district."

11/9/2021C. McCranie of Cherokee County
"Dear Rep. Bonnie Rich, I do not favor the redistricting plan for Cherokee County. Under this new plan, the lines for Rep Phillip’s district will reflect a 70-30% Democrat majority. This redistricting scheme does not accurately represent our community. The district lines must be drawn to accurately reflect the community of Cherokee County which is 80-20% Republican. You have the power to correct this injustice that goes against the will of the people. As you see daily, people are rising up to support elected officials who speak on behalf of their communities, and flipping seats of those who do not. We hope to be able to endorse you in the future rather than seek your replacement."

11/9/2021S. Huckaby of DeKalb County
"Dear Redistricting Committee, I have been a Dunwoody Resident for 17 years. I have watched our community grow from an unincorporated area into the close-knit community it is today. We share similar interests and goals for our city. In order to achieve our goals and interests, we should be kept together in one district. We have never had more than one House Representative and there is no reason to split us up since our population is well under the ideal size of a House district. Splitting us up will just make it harder for our community to achieve our common goals having to deal with 2 House Representatives. Please together by either making changes to the committee map or approve the Democrats’ map."

11/9/2021A. Rose of Fayette County
"I live in Fayette County for a reason. Our county is being divided into four districts with each one of the four being a minority part of the larger district based on population is very upsetting to me and my neighbors Based on the proposed map, Fayette would be split into districts 68, 69, 73 and 74. The majority by population of those districts lies outside of Fayette County which dilutes the votes of Fayette county residents. No disrespect to other counties, but I do not think that what is best for Fayette County should be decided by residents of south Fulton, Spalding, Henry and Coweta counties. Please, you can do better."

11/9/2021S. Stanhope of DeKalb County
"First the Election Integrity Act and now this to stain the reputation and legacy of Georgia. To make our democracy work, voters need to believe that their voices will be heard. The proposed Republican districts silence the very voices that seek to change Georgia into a more inclusive, innovative community. Please vote against this."

11/9/2021A. Starnes of DeKalb County
"I am a Dunwoody resident of 16 years. I am also a small business owner in Dunwoody Village. Please consider keeping Dunwoody in one district. We are a close knit community that is undergoing major upgrades, and we would greatly benefit from united leadership. Our population number is well under what a typical district entails, and there is has never been more than one leader for our district. I love this community and would appreciate this consideration. Thank you."

11/9/2021S. Brown of Jeff Davis County
"The redistricting of Representative Philip Singleton’s voting district is retaliation by Speaker of the House, Ralston. I spent 15+ years as a grassroots activist under Georgia’s Gold Dome, served on several political committees, and served as a local elected official for eight years. I personally experienced and observed Ralston’s activities. When, did the VOTERS of GEORGIA LOSE their RIGHT, without fear of retaliation of those in power, to hold accountable those who govern us? I watched representatives cower like wet, whining, dogs before Speaker of the House Ralston for years. Representative Singleton signed his name to a legal document asking for voter transparency for ALL voters; how many of you signed your full name to your comments? I respectfully ask, that this Committee conduct its redistricting deliberations in a non-partisan, non-retaliatory atmosphere, that speaks to the ethical and moral fiber of Georgia’s legislators."

11/9/2021W. Fisher of DeKalb County
"I have been a Dunwoody resident for 33 years. Dunwoody is a close-knit community with similar interests that should be kept together in one district. We have never had more than one House Representative. There is no reason to split us up since our population is well under the ideal size of a House district For reference, Dunwoody is about 52,000 people and an ideal House District size for this round of redistricting is around 59,000). The Democratic Caucus map keeps Dunwoody together. Therefore, I ask you to either make changes to the committee map to keep Dunwoody together or approve the Democratic Caucus map. Respectfully submitted,"

11/9/2021J. Mashburn of Cherokee County
"Notice of Demand to Cease and Desist Interfering with the Will of the People of Cherokee County. Notice to Agent is Notice to Principal and Notice to Principal is Notice to Agent. This redistricting map is an INTENTIONAL assault on election integrity AND an attempt to disrupt the ""Red Wall"" of Cherokee County. Whoever supports this redistricting map obviously couldn't care less about election integrity (or the Will of the People) & will be exposed for being bought and paid for by special interest groups. The Map Trap is set. So, I strongly urge you to overrule Ralston; or, We The People will exercise all our God-given & Constitutional authority to remove every last one of you backstabbers from office. We The People are watching. We The People demand & expect you to preserve 4 House seats & 1 Senate seat within Cherokee County borders. You would do well to remember your oath of office & that you are there SOLELY to serve/do the Will of We The People."

11/9/2021M. Shuman of DeKalb County
Please allow Dunwoody to remain as a cohesive city. We have lived in Dunwoody for 35 years- one district- one city. There is no logical reason for the new map!

11/9/2021A. Grace of DeKalb County
"If Democrats have the time and ability to submit their maps weeks out before ""due date"" for review, analysis and public feedback, anything submitted by Republicans should be subject to the same. To those who submitted last minute: Your job as a representative is to fairly--and transparently--serve the people. Do it."

11/9/2021T. Hughes of Chatham County
Those of you that think this is rushed is clueless of the process. It should have been done months ago but covid delayed it. We would like to see the county-level maps. School board elections coming up and we saw the democrats in Chatham gerrymandered the dickens out of the proposed maps.

11/9/2021E. Disner of DeKalb County
Dunwoody deserves to remain whole and represented by one person. Not split by the current restricting plan.

11/9/2021M. Wood of Thomas County
"I'm sorry to say that this new map is a travesty on the democratic process. It represents classic gerrymandering, a practice that we in Georgia should put behind us. Please vote NO on the new map."

11/9/2021C. Abbey of Coweta County
"I am strongly against the proposed merging of northern Coweta County into two separate districts. Please vote NO on the proposals which would do this. I have lived in Coweta County for 23 years. I am not pleased with the prospect of being in proposed GA House district 65 that spans three counties (Douglas across the Chattahoochee, South Fulton, and northern Coweta). A similar situation exists with proposed GA House district 67. Why are a natural boundary (the Chattahoochee River) and a political boundary (the county line) ignored in the proposed redistricting? Why is Northern Coweta County split into two districts that both have much larger areas in South Fulton? Wouldn’t it be more natural for all of Northern Coweta to be bundled together, possibly with Northern Fayette that also has been bundled with Fulton County?"

11/9/2021E. Kuniansky of DeKalb County
Dunwoody has been and should continue to be one district. Please do not split into two districts when the map is redrawn.

11/9/2021S. Doran of Whitfield County
"It is a terrible thing when citizens are clearly shown how corrupt and power hungry the GA Assembly is being ran. But make no mistake, more eyes than EVER before are now on the Georgia Assembly as we assess those who serve themselves and those that serve the people of Georgia. Over the past year the truth has come to light like never before to show just how deep corruption runs in GA politics. Deep enough that a decision has been made to remove one of the FEW representatives who was doing the right thing and fighting FOR his constituents and NOT COWERING TO THE ESTABLISHMENT. We the People demand our legislature to vote against the proposed redistricting of Mr. Singleton’s district and do the right thing and create the proper and fair district for Coweta county."

11/9/2021S. Levy of DeKalb County
I’ve been a Dunwoody resident for 15 years. I’ve enjoyed watching Dunwoody grow. The community has always had 1 representative. It doesn’t make sense to take out 2 small sections and split a city/community. It is my understanding that our population can be well represented by 1 Rep and keep Dunwoody whole. Please reconsider the changes to the map. This change removes the mayor from her Dist. and frankly does not make sense. It seems a very unnecessary change.

11/9/2021D. Goodman of DeKalb County
"My husband and I have been residents of Dunwoody for 22 years — before Dunwoody was a city. We are a close-a community with similar interests that should be kept together in one district. Dunwoody has about 52,000 residents and an ideal House District size for this round of redistricting is around 59,000. We have never had more than one House Representative, and there is no reason to split us up since we are well under the ideal size. The Democratic Caucus map keeps us together. Please either make changes to the committee map or approve the Democrats’ map. Thank you for your consideration."

11/9/2021D. Shendelman of DeKalb County
"I have been a resident of Dunwoody for over 25 years. I do not understand why the proposed boundaries of the State House map call for splitting up our City. That’s never been done and would be a disservice to our close knit community. We are best represented with only one House Rep. Importantly, our city is the ideal size for a House District. Please revise the current proposed committee map or approve the Democrats’ map. Keep Dunwoody in one District."

11/9/2021T. Rubin of Cobb County
"As a resident of GA and someone who works in Coweta County, I find it unacceptable that there will be a redistricting within HD-73 for no apparent reason, except as political retribution agains the current HD Rep Philip Singleton. This move will clearly jeopardize Rep Singleton's ability to maintain his seat within the state legislature which will have a negative consequence on the lives of Georgia's citizenry. I encourage Rep. Rich to defy David ralston and do the fair and honest thing which is to squelch this redistricting effort. IO will certainly follow this issue closely and pay attention to Rep. Richs' decision on this matter."

11/9/2021A. Wertheim of DeKalb County
"As a 40 year resident of Dunwoody, I cannot understand why our small city will now have more than one representative. We have ALWAYS had only one representative. This will make it difficult for our Mayor to work effectively to meet the needs of our small city. Our Mayor has been disenfranchised by being cut out of what should be her district. Please either make changes to the Committees map, or support the alternative map that would keep the City of Dunwoody under one representative."

11/9/2021A. Oki of DeKalb County
"I have been a resident of Dunwoody resident for almost 18 years. Dunwoody is a close-knit community with similar interests that should be kept together in one district. We have never had more than one House Representative and there is no reason to split us up since our population is well under the ideal size of a House district (for reference, Dunwoody is about 52,000 people and an ideal House District size for this round of redistricting is around 59,000). Please keep our city as one district."

11/8/2021V. Cuz of Oconee County
"I oppose the the House Redistricting Maps as proposed. Specifically, the redrawing of the Coweta County districts to unnaturally include a finger of Fulton County can only be seen as a vindictive effort of Speaker Ralston and his mafia to unseat Philip Singleton (R, 73), a co-plaintiff in VOTERGA lawsuit calling for the removal of Dominion Voting Systems from our state's elections. Ralston has an ugly history of vendettas against opponents in his own party as evidenced by the stripping of committee chairs from those who investigated the rampant 2020 election fraud. The people will remember this, and God willing, this wrong will be righted in 2022. Rep. Rich, listen to the people."

11/8/2021K. H of Coweta County
This is blatant Gerrymandering retribution against Philip Singleton and the conservative majority he represents. Fulton county elections have been problematic for a long time and I prefer that my vote actually count and not be destroyed or countered by a vote that came out of a suitcase pulled from under a table.

11/8/2021D. Sumner of DeKalb County
I was very surprised to see that Dunwoody would be split Into 2 house districts. We have lives here almost 20 years and it’s been my understanding that we’ve only had one representative for Dunwoody. It is also my understanding that we are a small enough to have one representative. It’s also sad that our current mayor wouldn’t be represented by her current legislator and the large Dunwoody district under the proposed map. Thanjavur you.

11/8/2021T. Laird of DeKalb County
"When a party loses an election, as Republicans did in both Senate races this past year, it is a signal to examine the direction and tone the party has taken that lost many voters. Instead this redistricting is a desperate attempt to ""game"" the system and has obviously bypassed the processes for public comment and the principles of fairness. Why not instead invest your efforts in bolstering rather than undermining representative democracy?"

11/8/2021L. Hough of Cherokee County
"The redistributing of Rep. Singletons district is nothing more than retribution for him standing up for election integrity. If this goes through the way Ralston wants it, then it is obvious that he and anyone that signs off on it is bought and paid for by special interest and could care less about election integrity and the will of We The People. I strongly recommend you reconsider this election map. Remember, if a truck driver in New Jersey can win, then we can primary anyone with an America First candidate. STOP THE FRAUD"

11/8/2021D. Merck of Gwinnett County
Bonnie Rich has the power to stop this as chairperson of this committee. Ralston is clearly trying to remove Singleton from his seat because of his involvement in the voterGA lawsuit regarding Dominion voting systems. We know that QR codes are unverifiable to the voter and are illegal under GA law. Ralston is trying to block voters from being represented by Singleton. Voters will not stand for this! Please do not approve this redistricting!

11/8/2021P. Eckhardt of Fulton County
"I oppose the redistricting maps as proposed, as well as the hurry-up process, pushing through without adequate public input. Yes, we the people, SEE the unfairness of what those we voted for are doing. Where is integrity, honesty and the democratic principals of our Constitution."

11/8/2021J. Hargreaves of Fulton County
"Our nation's existence and prosperity is at stake as a result of the assault on American values that are the foundation and reason for America's prosperity and success as a world leader. Those principles, beliefs, and values are being attacked by America's enemies = foreign and domestic. In many cases, our domestic enemies, including the fascist and elite progressives and Marxists, are being financed, directly or indirectly, for America's international enemies to include China, Russia, Iran, fundamentalist Islam, and atheists and traitors like George Soros. If we don't have ""fair"" elections, then we might as well NOT have any Rights. America's enemies can be seen in the ""soft"" opposition of David Ralston, or, those who actively corrupt the system like Stacey Abrams. Both are enemies of the People's freedom and Rights. For those who do nothing, as the saying goes, the hottest place in hell is reserved for them."

11/8/2021S. Aleshire of Oconee County
"David Ralston, current speaker of the house, is abusing and in fact using his office as a weapon against his political enemies. His redistricting efforts are clearly a gross effort to eliminate multiple Republicans who question his authority. He seems to be acting more like controlled opposition for the Democrats than a republican colleague. It is time to consider either impeaching him or obtaining a viable candidate to run in a primary against him. Ralston is out of control. He's been in his office too long."

11/8/2021S. Burchardt of Fulton County
Representative Singleton now has an 80-20% Republican majority in his District. Moving him to a district that has a 70 -30% Democrat majority is WRONG. This is an injustice to him and the people he represents. It is not in the best interest for the Republican Party or our state.

11/8/2021A. Knowles of Floyd County
I strongly oppose the redistricting effort that undermines the will of the people wanting fair elections. The Dominion voting machines are compromised and can be accessed by the internet Because Phillip Singleton stood for honesty and integrity some now want to redistrict him out of his seat. Please I beg you to reconsider. We want to remain a. Free Republic with every LEGAL vote counting. Keep Phillip singleton in district 73. Thank you in advance for doing what is right and just. God is all seeing and all knowing. Be on the freedom side of histroy If freedom is lost in America we will have no where else to go God Bless each of you. Ask for His guidance and wisdom Thanks inadvance Angela Knowles

11/8/2021W. Arthur of Screven County
"I strongly oppose the redistricting effort, which is clearly designed to Jerrymander Rep Singleton out of his seat. The reason is simply that he is attempting to get our elected government to follow it's own laws with respect to the illegal Dominion voting machines that thwart the will of the people and steal our votes. If the votes are going one way or the other in reality, they'll still be that way when we go back to counting them manually. Otherwise, it's rigged. It's simple as that. Please ensure fair lines are drawn. And how about taking my call next time instead of leaving a message to ""go to the website."" I am out here working for a living and took time out of a busy day because this was important to me and you could at least answer the phone."

11/8/2021O. Alligood of Gwinnett County
"I oppose the unfair redistricting attempt to undermine and limit Conservative representation. I don’t understand with Republican control in the House and Senate why you are purposely proposing redistricting that favors the Democrats? We the people voted for Republicans knowing that redistricting would be determined this year. If this is Speaker Ralston’s attempt at retribution for anyone standing up to him, then he is not looking out for the best interest of Georgia Republicans and neither is anyone that votes with him on this issue."

11/8/2021N. Tieman of DeKalb County
Redistricting MUST BE BIPARTISAN. To do otherwise would be a slap in the face of Democracy. Please do the right and moral thing and make redistricting BIPARTISAN. Thank you

11/8/2021M. Hodges of Gwinnett County
"Yes, Bonnie Rich can put a stop to We the People being ignored on redistricting This redistricting map has received failing grades from non-partisan groups. We the People are awake and watching."

11/8/2021V. Sutton of Floyd County
"I would say our Republican officials removing one of our own by redistricting is shocking, but it’s not. I believe the elected officials believe we are just going to quietly go back to normal if they don’t get rid of dominion election software. Instead of listening to we the people, they are going to get rid of the one elected official who is listening to the majority of we the people in Georgia and fighting for us to dump Dominion. It’s time we voted out these career politicians who are choosing to ignore us. We ask them to rethink this redistricting circus campaign and do NOT get rid of Mr Singleton. Of course, I’m prepared to be ignored by them. They are above their constituents after all. Otherwise, dominion would have been gone by now instead of them looking to remove a Republican who’s fighting against the software company."

11/8/2021C. Cape of Cherokee County
"We need four house seats, and one senator seat in Cherokee County."

11/8/2021J. Hodges of Cobb County
It’s time for our Republican representatives to actually uphold the will of the people who placed them in office rather than playing political games. This obnoxious attempt to finger district lines into Coweta county to displace Rep Singleton is a disgraceful attempt at retribution by Ralston. We see you. Conservatives are more tuned into our elected officials than ever before and we PROMISE to campaign against and unseat anyone who subverts our vote through gerrymandering and political malice. Election integrity is a winning issue and of utmost importance and targeting those who listen and actually work on behalf of their constituents will not be overlooked.

11/8/2021S. Lastinger of Coffee County
"The speaker's attempt to remove Dominic LaRiccia from office by redistriciting him out of most of Coffee County is a low blow. He has put him competing against the representative in Ware county in which there would be a good conservative representative getting beat in the primary. All because he doesn't want Rep. LaRiccia running for the caucus chair. This is the ""swamp"" that we need to get rid of. Help me find a guy to primary against the speaker. I am going to do everything in my power to expose him. This is just one example."

11/8/2021K. Williams of Chatham County
What the Heck!?! I thought David Ralston was supposed to help increase the number of republican seats in the house and not steal them away to be vindictive. It shows everyone that he doesn't care about Georgia republicans!! Georgians make sure to remind everyone that BONNIE RICH has the power to stop this!!

11/8/2021J. Hodges of Cobb County
The redistricting of this Fulton district is clearly an attempt to undermine the representation of Coweta county - Do not let this happen!

11/8/2021G. Houghton of Cherokee County
Voter GA is a non-partisan organization representing all Georgians in election integrity. It is infuriating that redistricting would be used to penalize a legislator for supporting the very election laws the legislature itself passed!! I am sick and tired of this sort of childish behavior from our elected officials and implore you to overrule Speaker Ralston and act with integrity on behalf of your constituents.

11/8/2021M. Knope of DeKalb County
"I am very upset that this proposed map splits Dunwoody, a community where I have lived for years. Dunwoody is a close knit, cohesive community. It's like a small town. We have been in the same House District for more than a decade. Our population is still small enough to be kept together. Please keep us together as a community of interest."

11/8/2021L. Petcu of Barrow County
"Speaker David Ralston's attempt to redistrict Rep. Singleton out of his seat as retribution for standing up for his constituents' concerns about voter integrity, it's unacceptable. Georgia GOP has to rally not behind Speaker Ralston. Every single Republican up for reelection will come and ask for our vote soon enough. Rest assured, we will remember the cowards, and we had enough of your excuses. DO THE RIGHT THING."

11/8/2021K. M of Gwinnett County
This is a political witch hunt and nothing more. It has nothing to do with better serving the people you're supposed to represent and everything to do with punishing people who have the will of the people behind them. We see you - and we're done with this nonsense. Vote yes at your own political peril.

11/8/2021D. Whaley of Cherokee County
As an ex-NYer I can spot tampering with the will of the People and this is certainly it! This is not an acceptable plan for redistricting. Nor the best way for the ppl to be heard - at all. A fairer plan is in order stat! So is a full state election audit while we are at it! Stop trying to redistricting out constitutional public servants for honoring the will of the ppl!

11/8/2021L. Skaggs of Coweta County
"This is Gerrymandering by definition! PLEASE VOTE NO! This map is atrocious and leaves a good portion of the voters of my county without any voice or representation. Northern Coweta County, South Fulton and Douglas Counties have nothing in common regarding the issues that matter to us and our respective communities. Stealing votes, again, reflects poorly on the body who created it. DO NOT PASS THIS MAP AS IT CURRENTLY IS DRAWN! LEAVE COWETA COUNTY ALONE! VOTE NO!!"

11/8/2021K. Carlisle of Lowndes County
We oppose the unfair redistricting attempt to undermine and limit Conservative representation. More time and thought towards fairness should be included in this process.

11/8/2021J. Clodfelter of Gwinnett County
You all seem to be underhanded legislators. You are redistricting Singleton because he is listening to we the people. A federal judge ruled that the machines are illegal because they are not human readable. Were you a legislator that was selected by machines or were you elected? Your vote on redistricting will answer my question. Sincerely Janelle Clodfelter

11/8/2021D. Ratonyi of DeKalb County
I am concerned about splitting Dunwoody into separate districts. We are a small city that ought to be able to have unified representation. Thank you!

11/8/2021B. Berman of Fulton County
"I heartily oppose the redistricting maps as drawn. They are obviously an attempt to cheat urban, low income and people of color out of their democratic rights."

11/8/2021C. Howard of Fulton County
"This map has been released late, planned with partisan interests in mind, and has been given a failing grade for fairness. I want Georgia to have an independent commission to work on the redistricting map so that all Georgians can have an equal voice."

11/8/2021M. Hill of DeKalb County
"I oppose the redistricting maps as proposed, as well as the hurry-up process by which you are pushing them through without adequate public input. The Senate district map received an ""F"" grade from Fair Districts Georgia and the Princeton Gerrymandering Project - it's clear why. Georgia can do better than this. Divide it up fairly and let the people speak. The state legislature as it stands now and looks to be in the future is not representative of what Georgians think or want. Do what's right for our state and not your party."

11/8/2021A. Tennenbaum of Fulton County
"The redistricting process has not been transparent or accessible. Transparency and the opportunity to participate have been some of the primary demands from the public regarding this process -- I had trouble figuring out what was going on, especially with less than 1 week between when the maps were released and when they might be voted on. It was difficult to find the most updated proposed maps, compare them to current maps, and know how best to make my voice heard and by when. I am also concerned that the proposed maps do not have community representation in mind: Georgia is a 50-50 split between Republicans and Democrats, but the proposed maps do not reflect that partisan balance, and therefore are not a reflection of our state. I want to know that when I vote, I am able to choose who represents me and the desires of my community."

11/8/2021A. Zook of Cherokee County
Cherokee County NEEDS four (4) house district seats and one (1) senator seat in the county. This is imperative to Cherokee County residents!

11/8/2021A. Zook of Cherokee County
"Though I live in Cherokee County, changing to more fair redistricting in Fulton Co. is very important to all Georgians. Please DO NOT extend Fulton Co. further south into Chatom County!"

11/8/2021R. Routsong of Coweta County
I am writing to say that I am strongly opposed to any Redistricting of Northern Coweta County. Coweta County representation does not need to be in Fulton County. We need to be represented by someone who lives in Coweta County and not As an afterthought to Fulton County. Please vote NO. Thank you

11/8/2021B. Hines of Cherokee County
This is an obvious power grab & is not in the best interest of fair elections.

11/8/2021B. Walker of Cherokee County
Cherokee needs four (4) house district seats and one (1) senator seat in the county.

11/8/2021S. Butler of Fulton County
"Draw the Redistricting Lines More Fairly The new restricting moves the Republican from District 73 that has an 80-20% Republican majority to District 67 that has a 70-30% Democrat majority. This is a clear attempt by House Speaker David Ralston to redistrict a republican out of his seat! Kindly stop this injustice! This mere retribution by Ralston DOES NOT benefit the republican party! Thank you, A VERY CONCERNED REPUBLICAN CITIZEN"

11/8/2021N. Burchell of DeKalb County
The Republican redistricting and gerrymandering of the electoral maps is blatantly political in favor of the GOP and continues to undermine the democratic principles this country was built upon.

11/8/2021S. Wymer of Cherokee County
"The Senate district map received an ""F"" grade from Fair Districts Georgia and the Princeton Gerrymandering Project. As one of the strongest republican counties in the state it is imperative that we have at least four (4) house district seats and one (1) senator seat in the county. The current proposal is unjust, unfair and a clear overreach to unseat certain representatives. I object to this redistricting and support a motion to return this proposal to it's committee to be re-evaluated."

11/8/2021A. Ferrard of Fulton County
"Looks like your maps were given an F for good reason. As demographics change, the maps should change. They should change to reflect the population, not to protect any party. Listen to your constituents and change the maps. You may have been given the data late from the US Census, but that does not justify trampling the process and ignoring the concerns of Georgians. Fair maps. This year."

11/8/2021R. Patton of Bryan County
"If you want your redistricting results to have credibility and the trust of the voters, you must give more time to ordinary citizens to review these maps. To rush the vote to committee and to the full legislature adds mistrust and suspicion to your actions. Give people time to understand the implications of these maps…. If you care about or want their support."

11/8/2021C. Johnson of Columbia County
"I am a member of the Columbia County Republican group & VoterGA. Understand that Republicans are wide awake to the fact that we have other ""R's"" in office who do not have our State's and Country's best interests at heart, and we are watching our elected officials CLOSELY during this special session to identify any party members that we want removed from office. If this special session is wasted on anything other than working to eliminate corruption in our election process (forensic audit), & to protect Georgia citizens from illegal Nuremberg Code defying MANDATES (while Congress/CDC have NO MANDATES...don't think we didn't notice) then you are PAINFULLY out of touch w/ the people who elected you, that are losing their jobs, kids can't go to college, & now they are coming after our children w/ this untested gene therapy. If we find that Rep. Singleton's district has been touched for actually HEARING the concerns of his constituents, we will know where Ralston & Rich stand."

11/8/2021G. Hofgex of Gwinnett County
VOTE NO on redistricting. David Ralston’s redistricting charade is completely and transparently vindictive. The people of Georgia have had enough.

11/8/2021E. Fusillo of DeKalb County
"All eyes are on Georgia now and in the future. The purposeful denigration of the redistricting process by the Republican legislature in Georgia do not make for a good look. To our GOP representatives, know that voters will work hard to overcome the handicap you plan for them. Georgia lawmakers must represent what Georgia really is--and that is not white and male anymore."

11/8/2021J. Smith of DeKalb County
"The Senate district map received an ""F"" grade from Fair Districts Georgia and the Princeton Gerrymandering Project - we can do better than this. Divide it up fairly and let the people speak. The GA legislature as it stands now and looks to be in the future is not representative of what Georgians think or want. Do what's right for our state and not your party."

11/8/2021F. Boswell of Coweta County
"What is Gerrymandering in simple terms? Gerrymandering is when a political group tries to change a voting district to create a result that helps them or hurts the group who is against them. Gerrymandering works by wasting votes. It puts more votes of winners into the district they will win so the losers win in another district. Now listen to your constituents and vote NO. These comments makes it clear that the redistricting isn't supported nor wanted. Considering that Coweta is a conservative county, incorporating any part of Coweta into the Fulton voting lines would simply be silencing a large number of the voters. This is especially disturbing considering that parts of south Fulton wish to become part of Coweta. Fulton County and Coweta County have different lifestyles therefore different values. Neither county should speak for the other. This is simply unacceptable so do your job and VOTE NO!"

11/8/2021K. Grindlay of Gwinnett County
"Are we supposed to believe it's a coincidence that Rep. Singleton is being redistricting out of office after he pointed out that there has not been a real audit of the 2020 election and after he fought to remove Dominion machines? What a joke. If you go forward with this, We the People will be holding every single person involved accountable at the polls during primaries. We will not forget this. Choose wisely."

11/8/2021P. REEL of Cherokee County
"Please do NOt use the present map for redistricting! Do not divide Cherokee Co. to weaken our vote! We want 1 senator and 4 representatives that live in Cherokee County. Secondly, I object with the current proposed map that will take Rep Phil Singelton out of his district in Coweta County where the people voted for him by 75%. Please put the lines back to make Coweta County whole. Finally, I object to the way the current proposed map favors Democrats in District 43 in East Cobb and District 35 in Kennesaw to the Democrats."

11/8/2021D. Roesler of Coweta County
I am writing to say that I am strongly opposed to any Redistricting of Northern Coweta County. Coweta County representation does not need to be in Fulton County. We need to be represented by someone who lives in County and not As an afterthought to Fulton County. Please vote NO. Thank you

11/8/2021J. LaFond of Coweta County
"Your job is to listen to your constituents, and vote accordingly. Reading the comments, alone, makes it clear that the redistricting isn't supported. Coweta is a conservative county. Making any part of us changed to Fulton would be simply removing our voice. Fulton absolutely does NOT reflect the values, and desires, of Coweta. This is simply unacceptable. Do your job and VOTE NO!"

11/8/2021S. Berson of Gwinnett County
The republicans will keep doing whatever they want until we stop them. So VOTE. We must gain majority and somehow change this redistricting that keeps them in power.

11/8/2021C. Smith of Coweta County
Vote no on redistricting northern coweta county. There is no reason to cross the country line to group us with South Fulton. Our needs and lifestyles are not reflected in any way with with any of that of Fulton country

11/8/2021S. Soriya of DeKalb County
"You must put forth proposals to the community before going to a vote. This is a bifurcated state now, it is not a RED state as was shown in the last national elections. Therefore you must get buy-in from your constituents!"

11/8/2021K. Stanhope of DeKalb County
These maps show why we need non-partisan districting committees. It's so frustrating to see how these are complete unresponsive to the voices of voters. Please vote no on these maps and work towards transforming how redistricting works in Georgia.

11/8/2021M. New of Cherokee County
The present map for redistricting is unacceptable! Do not divide Cherokee Co. to weaken our vote! We want 1 senator and 4 representatives that live in Cherokee County. Stop using the reapportionment to punish those you do not like. An example is Philip Singleton whom Ralston wants to get rid of because he does not agree with him about the Dominion voting machines.

11/8/2021J. Olkin of DeKalb County
These partisan games are unraveling the core fabric of our democracy and society. Do it again and meet the independent standards for fairness.

11/8/2021D. Tash of Cherokee County
"VOTE NO to this horrendous redistricting that comes out of nowhere, with no reason for it other than to dismantle Cherokee County representation. Is this the SIGN that even the Georgia Legislature cannot be counted on to do the will of its citizens for the benefit of their own county?"

11/8/2021P. Reardon of Cobb County
"I object with greatest respect that taking Rep Phil Singelton out of his district in Coweta County where the people voted for him by 75%, even against a primary candidate, each time is downright vindictive and shame on you! Please put the lines back to make Coweta County whole. Second, I object to trying to give away D 43 in East Cobb to the D and D 35 in Kennesaw to the D. We are working hard to get our majority back in Cobb and now you are making it harder.. Did you not learn from Virginia? Please put 43 back."

11/8/2021S. Marks of DeKalb County
"The redistricting process that has provided little to no time for review and debate is a travesty of justice. It is fascism under the cloak of darkness. The GOP would be ashamed, if they had any scruples."

11/8/2021J. Parker of DeKalb County
"Vote NO for this map. It clearly shows the contempt that the state Republicans have for the citizens of Georgia, for democracy and for justice."

11/8/2021M. Hodges of Gwinnett County
Absolutely VOTE NO on the redistricting. This redistricting map is not only egregious it is vindictive. The people of Georgia are awake and we are watching.

11/8/2021S. J Hill of Cobb County
"Go Braves! They did too, they went too fast through Atlanta dissing fans, young and old, that sat for hours in the cold. Just like the Braves, no regard for the fans, you have no regard for the people you serve. No matter the party, what is fair and right is not in your purview. Thousands have suffered and died, hospitals closed and billions not received, by not expanding Medicaid. What you are put under the gold done to be, is ""for the people."" Dissing the will of the people, is like an employee clocked in and out shopping. Let's be clear, Truist Park might be a great place, which the now Cobb Chair voted against. However, Cobb Citizens for Gov't Transparency, understood like the economist has cited, Cobb residents will be paying for that experience for years. Remember, it was never about having the stadium there, it was HOW it was done she voted against. VOTE NO! We're here pleading for the HOW, NOW! Fair maps for Fair representation. Vote for Fair Maps and stand for righteousness!"

11/8/2021D. Burks of Coweta County
"VOTE NO to the Republican proposed map. In north Coweta County, communities of interest were NOT distracted together. Northwest Coweta is with South Fulton and Douglas Counties. All these counties have vastly different demographics and concerns. Northeast Coweta (suburban and rural) is placed with the metropolitan areas of Fulton county. the cities of Palmetto and Fairburn. It does not appear any attempt was made to keep communities of interest intact. Three county lines are crossed creating areas that are connected in no manner except the voting district being forced upon them. This map was kept hidden from the public until Tuseday, Nov 2, 2021 at 4pm. Very little allowed for public review. VOTE NO"

11/8/2021A. Burks of Coweta County
"Vote NO to the Republican map. Normally, voting district maps respect County lines. At the very least, if lines are crossed, it is into an area with similar concerns. The Republican proposed map drags the North West Coweta County voter district across 3 counties; Coweta, Fulton, and Douglas. There is no attempt to keep any of the communities of interest intact. Northeast Coweta County's district will include the towns of Fairburn and Palmetto in Fulton County. Northeast Coweta is rural and suburban; the Palmetto/ Fairburn corridor is far more metropolitan. The priorities for the Coweta side VS the Fulton side are vastly different. Again, crossing county lines and ignoring the community of interest. In Northeast Coweta, a candidate can win the election without a single Coweta vote. How can those citizens expect real representation of their community? How can the very rural northwest Coweta district expect their needs to be as important as South Fulton Industrial Blvd? VOTE NO"

11/8/2021K. Aaron of Coweta County
PLEASE VOTE NO!!! This map is atrocious and basically leaves a good portion of the voters of my county without any representation in the house. Northern Coweta County and South Fulton County have nothing in common regarding the issues that matter to us. This map is atrocious and reflects poorly on the body who created it. DO NOT PASS THIS MAP AS IT CURRENTLY IS DRAWN! LEAVE Coweta County ALONE!

11/8/2021C. Morrow of Cherokee County
"As you have asked for public input, here it is: I am not happy with the way this is trending; Cherokee county needs four (4) house district seats and one (1) senator seat in the county. A reminder: YOU work for US. We The People. Don't piss us off."

11/7/2021C. Schwartz of Thomas County
"Please vote NO on the new map. It is clear that Majority legislators are picking their constituents rather than the opposite. Particularly, population increases in metro-Atlanta warrant greater representation not less. Transfers from primarily blue districts into other districts, gerrymandering, will cancel voting rights of many Georgians and reflect the will nor needs of those individuals. Legislation favoring tyranny and callous disregard for the inherent rights of others by seizing greater control and privilege (taxation without representation) is despotic. Our children and students are becoming less educated already (but not in China) while adults engage in genuine misdeeds and howls of conspiracy theories and misinformation. We are fast losing strength towards the unattained, though exquisitely [script]ed Constitution of a representative democracy, much as we are rapidly losing ground to sea-level rise and denial of climate change realities. We could be so much better than"

11/7/2021M. From Adair Park of Fulton County
"Casual observation suggests that the comments don't matter. The point of paying for each individual map is probably designed with the idea being that people will only download the 1 map that applies to them, the data from the downloads will then be used to make final decisions."

11/7/2021D. Arthan of Fulton County
"END PRISON GERRYMANDERING. 50,000 are counted by the census as residents of the 34 prisons where they are in custody of the GDC. They are completely removed from their Community of Interest"" illogically and inaccurately added to the county where they are incarcerated. In the 2nd Congressional district prisoners account for 10,700 of the population. Many rural counties have more than 15% of their total ""population"" imprisoned. In the Metro Atlanta counties thousands are removed from the census count annually. I urge this committee to end this PRISON GERRYMANDERING by recommending that the next census record the home address of incarcerated citizens and that immediate action be requested of counties to adjust for their incarcerated citizens.We want accuracy, transparency and justice in determining the communities of interest of our people. Treat our prisoners as human beings, count them fairly"

11/7/2021D. Lewicki of DeKalb County
"This ain't right and you know it. Fix it. Make it right. Quit the partisan gerrymandering. It sucks the soul out of democracy. Work with the other party and draw fair maps--maps that you both don't like but can live with. It'll be better for all of us, better for the state of Georgia, and a helluva lot better than what the majority party is proposing now."

11/6/2021P. Fountain of Coweta County
"Vote NO on the redistricting of North Coweta into the South Fulton District. South Fulton is 80% Democratic, my vote would never count if we are forced to vote in the South Fulton district. South Fulton does not represent the values, ideas or families who live in North Coweta. We want to preserve the election integrity of Coweta County and not be forced to vote in a district in which we would have no voice. We adamantly are against this redistricting and strongly suggest that you vote NO."

11/6/2021E. Embrey of Cherokee County
You folks say you are welcome for our INPUT. As you can Read the THE PUBLIC INPUT SUBMISSIONS ....We are not all happy with the the plans you have to Redistricting...we the people will not be silent or shrink back to hold you responsible to your OATH of office to serve our community....we pay our taxes and pay your salaries. This is America!!!!!!!! For God Sake do the right thing and vote NO for the redistricting......No more Politics that serve you......but truly serve the people.....

11/6/2021C. Alexander of Fayette County
"I would like to request the committee to go back to the Drawing Board Literally and complete the redistricting that you know is fair and just to ALL voters in GA. Please stop the political games for your own personal gain. Cheaters never win even though you may think you have won. God takes care of His children so eventually your selfish plans will backfire on you, so just do the right thing from the outset."

11/6/2021S. Hughes of Gwinnett County
"Please vote NO on the Republican drawn maps. I campaigned and canvassed for my Gwinnett representative, and the GOP will now take away my choice and the choice of the voters in my district. The GOP map targets a representative who is a PhD scientist and a senator who is an MD, both of whom have knowledge and experience that are particularly valuable to our state government. I'm really, really tired of the GOP picking their voters, rather than letting the voters choose their own representatives. When I lived in Cobb County, my state senator was taken away from me by redistricting in 2011. Now they are going after my Gwinnett representative in 2021. Stop cheating through partisan gerrymandering, GOP. If this is the only way you can win elections, maybe your actual policies need to change."

11/6/2021B. Bibee of Coweta County
"Vote NO on Republican House redistricting map proposal. This map will push Coweta Republican voters into Democratic strongholds, forever losing our votes. North Coweta is one of the most conservative bases in our state. How will we have representation being put into a district that is 80% Democratic and does not share our values or the conservative ideas of the county? I am against this redistricting that misrepresents the voters of North Coweta County."

11/6/2021M. Baron of Fulton County
"I live in Sandy Springs. The maps as drawn will be detrimental to African American and Hispanic voters in this city. Several of the House districts have been drawn in a way that splits areas with predominately minority voters and dilutes their vote. This brazen partisan effort is a violation of our democratic principles. In addition, the process used to create these maps lacked transparency and fairness. To release the maps and vote on them without allowing the public to fully review them and comment accordingly is shameful."

11/6/2021M. Stoops of DeKalb County
"The Republican proposal is so disheartening both in terms of the process that has been rushed and allowed minimal public comment, and the result that does not reflect the current demographics of our state based on the most recent census. I urge our lawmakers to do better and create a map that allows voters of color their right to be represented. A non-partisan analysis has given the plan an F. The Democratic plan stands in stark contrast the Republican plan."

11/6/2021A. Swygert of DeKalb County
"FOR THE HOUSE: I’m a 33 year GA resident interested in redistricting reform as it is foundational to our democracy. Legislators cannot be trusted with this solemn responsibility with so much self interest at stake.The House map is clearly focused on protecting GOP incumbents rather than serving the voters, resulting in 63% of GA’s small cities being split into multiple districts. I live in Dunwoody, a very cohesive, small town in a big city. I’ve served on the board of the Dunwoody Homeowner’s Association and the city’s most recent Charter Review Commission. Dunwoody’s population 51,683 — well within the ideal size of an HD. Yet, the Committee split us into two HDs by moving just two precincts out of the district. I live in one of those precincts, as does the Mayor of Dunwoody. Now neither of us have a voice in who represents the majority of our City. You stole our votes to protect an incumbent. Shame on you. Please vote for the Democratic map that keeps communities together."

11/6/2021A. Swygert of DeKalb County
"FOR THE SENATE: I’m a 33-year GA resident and taxpayer. I have a particular interest in redistricting reform because it is foundational to our democracy. Legislators cannot be trusted with this solemn responsibility with so much self interest at stake. It is perfectly clear that the GOP proposed Congressional map was clearly drawn to specifically target and disadvantage Rep. Lucy McBath whose current constituents love and admire her. Redistricting should not be about partisan gain, it is simply about balancing population numbers. Redistricting should be laser-focused on the interests of the voters and the Congressional map fails at that. The Senate Committee map fails to increase minority representation in a state that is much more diverse than it was 10 years ago. It does not provide adequate partisan balance in a 50/50 swing state, and it gives GA only 1 competitive district which will only create more dysfunction and extreme partisanship in the GA Senate for the next decade."

11/6/2021B. Villines of DeKalb County
"The Republican Senate map failed! For the sake of fairness and support of the diversity of the state of Georgia, please choose the Democratic Senate map!"

11/6/2021M. Carter of DeKalb County
"Districts maps lopsidedly rigged to assure winning outcomes for a particular party are damaging to Georgia. They cause voters to disengage entirely from voting and increase cynicism. Perhaps that is the intention of the Republican map, but it is damaging to the communities and to the state. Progress happens with thoughtful participation, not with cynical rejection of belief in government."

11/6/2021P. Thornton of Coweta County
"After reading the thread of comments to this committee regarding Coweta County and Fulton County, many constituents do NOT want it for many great reasons. It was not right in 2001 by the Dems when they pushed redistricting and this will be a repeat of what we should have learned, it is not right to redistrict. Leave Newnan alone. Please do not allow this Redistricting to occur. Vote NO to redistrict."

11/6/2021P. Thornton of Coweta County
"I just heard about the re-districting North Coweta County into South Fulton. I am so against this vote!!! I am mad o no end and please do not vote for this on Wednesday! And need you to support SB19 to eliminate surgical smoke from the operating rooms. I sick of being sick smelling human tissue burning! Thank you, Pat Thornton RN, CNOR"

11/6/2021M. Dunn of Cobb County
To represent all Georgians the Georgia legislature must provide apportionment maps that provide ALL Georgians an opportunity to vote for candidates THEY want to represent them.

11/5/2021D. Sumner of DeKalb County
Quite a disturbing rush job with maps that received a failing grade according to nonpartisan experts. Truly just sad.

11/5/2021M. Bagwell of DeKalb County
I beg you to go back to the drawing board and produce a fair map that reflects the real population of Georgia. Your map clearly is drawn to favor Republicans and will not produce a fair election result. I know you are going to say the Democrats did this in the past and this is true but that did not make it right. I opposed it then as I do now. If you feel that your policies are what is good for the state then you should not be afraid to allow for fair elections.

11/5/2021C. Kemp of DeKalb County
"Passing this map in this manner reeks of partisan manipulation. Republicans are not the only elected representatives of the citizens of this state - you owe it to not only your own constituents, but to democracy itself, to act with the interests of the people in mind, and not your party or your donors. Doing otherwise is Un-American, no matter what party you belong to. Do your damn jobs or quit and go home!"

11/5/2021C. Herrera of DeKalb County
"The Gerrymandering Project from the Electoral Innovation Lab at the University of Princeton qualifies the latest, 11/05/21, Georgia 2021 Draft Senate Republican Chair State Senate Map (Senate Bill 1EX) as very UNFAIR AND UNCOMPETITIVE relative to other maps that could have been drawn. It is VERY DISAPPOINTING that you cannot advocate for the citizens that you are supposed to represent and can only advocate for your party."

11/5/2021D. Jones of Fulton County
"And while we're at it, I implore these committees, beg really, that y'all stop talking about 2001. We get it Democrats also gerrymandered their maps. It was wrong then. And there have been many comments asking if people approved of it then. I'm positive many did and many did not, but personally, I was 6. I find it incredibly disingenuous for lawmakers to bring up something from 20 years ago to justify harming people today. The sins of the past must not dictate our future. It was wrong when Dems did it. It is wrong when Repubs do it. it is wrong. We cannot go back to 2001 and relitigate that map, but we can ensure we do better. Do not punish generations of Georgians who are too young to have a say, or aren't here yet. These are peoples lives, not a tit for tat game. It's also very boring to hear about, and a waste of time. Worry about wasting taxpayer dollars bringing up old hurts, and focus on not causing new ones."

11/5/2021D. Jones of Fulton County
"I know that this esteemed body likes to write those of us living in Atlanta as not ""real"" Georgia, so before I begin, please know that I was born and raised in Valdosta, and went to college in Macon, so I am, indeed, a real Georgian. The maps that have been presented by the committees from the respective chambers have both come short in achieving the goals set out by the redistricting guidelines. In Ware County, the city of Waycross is cut in half on the proposed senate map, as is Douglas in Coffee County. These places are not just a swamp or the butt of your breakfast jokes, they're places where real Georgians live. These maps were not presented with adequate time to study, analyze, form opinions or objections. I love Thanksgiving more than the next person, but it is an arbitrary deadline that y'all are using to get out of actually fulfilling the duties y'all ask God for the strength to complete in the pre-meeting prayers. Take some time and do it right."

11/5/2021C. Johnston of DeKalb County
I am very disappointed yet not surprised at the partisanship reflected in the proposed maps. The process has been rushed and also almost totally devoid of public input. The process lacks transparency and fairness. It is protective of the GOP majority over the good of all Georgians.

11/5/2021K. Morris of DeKalb County
"I demand a fair redistricting map that acknowledges Georgia's diversity, geography and political reality. The Republican map fails on all counts. I also demand a fair and open process for hearings. Georgians want transparency and to be heard. The Democratic map accounts for the diverse population of the state and reflects the will of the voters. Legislators, do better!"

11/5/2021J. Saliers of DeKalb County
This is not the transparent process voters asked for. We demand fair maps that reflect our state's diversity and political reality. The GOP's proposed map is not acceptable. Democrats have proposed a fairer map which reflects the voters and Georgia’s diverse population.

11/5/2021J. Chamberlin of Coweta County
I am against the redistricting of any sections of Coweta County resulting in a misrepresentation of a large portion of Coweta County voters. I vote for a reason and this is just another way of stealing votes.

11/5/2021K. Thomas of Oconee County
"The proposed state Republican maps reflect the type of partisanship and divisive strategy that only encourages discord and continued conflict based on race and poor campaigning. I ask that you utilize your power to ensure Fair Maps for everyone, demonstrate that you are not fearful of the changing demographics of our State and non-Atlanta area communities, and can be the type of public servants and leaders that you claim to be to represent ALL Georgians."

11/5/2021R. Davis of DeKalb County
"The proposed map does not reflect the current diversity of our State, and does not recognize that our population growth comes largely from minority populations. Republicans would do themselves a great favor by drawing district maps that lean toward fairness. That way, they might learn to win elections by competing in the marketplace of ideas, not by gimmickrey."

11/5/2021L. Randall of Fulton County
"I am alarmed at the partisan nature of the proposed redistricting. Lucy McBath won twice with a clear margin and has done a great job representing district 6, and adding some of Forsyth to her district is a clear attempt to push her out of Congress. When a majority of Georgians vote Democrat but Republicans hold a majority of state house/senate and US congressional seats in the state, you know it’s because of gerrymandering."

11/5/2021J. Stone of Coweta County
"Please do NOT pass the proposed redistricting map. I oppose the dissecting of District 71 and placing the northern section of the district in a district with South Fulton County. I just moved to Coweta County. People should be able to vote as a community. This happened to me in Henry County years ago when after redistricting, I found myself in a district controlled by Dekalb County. Leave District 71 as is!"

11/5/2021A. Glass of Whitfield County
These maps should be redrawn by a nonpartisan committee. The proposed districts look gerrymandered.

11/5/2021J. Murphy of Coweta County
If the process is non partisan then I would accept the results. But the Republican leadership deciding to blow up district 71 because you don’t like Phillip Singleton and his type of constitutional conservatism is unconscionable!!! So you would take my vote and make it null and void . Weaponizing redistricting is not acceptable!!! If you do this I will never vote in this state except to try to remove the corrupt from office. Can you hear this Bonnie Rich Lynn Smith John Kennedy David Ralston!!!

11/5/2021M. Knope of DeKalb County
"I am extremely frustrated by this intentionally rushed process. The lack of time for the public to review and comment on the proposed maps shows complete disregard for the people of Georgia. The proposed maps are classic examples of ""packing and cracking,"" taking us backward in terms of partisan balance and minority representation in our increasingly diverse state."

11/5/2021D. Denton of Fulton County
"I would add to my previous comments that there are numerous examples on these maps which clearly show ill intent. In addition to the proposed changes for congressional GA06 held by US Rep Lucy McBath,, look at the proposed changes to SD 48, held by state Sen. Michelle Au of Johns Creek. The proposed plan turns majority-minority districts to majority-white districts. This is not representative of the community and is a clear effort to lessen the impact of non-white voters. This is wrong. The lines must be drawn fairly."

11/5/2021D. Denton of Fulton County
"I urge that a nonpartisan group complete the final maps. I do not support maps which appear to have been drawn with the intent of giving an advantage to one party. Districts should be drawn in a way that does not fragment, dilute, or diminish the votes of the people within them. Districts should be drawn in a way that reflects the population and density. Please consider alternative maps that take those factors into account. Please make the maps available with more time for public comment before sessions. Please draw the maps fairly with a transparent and nonpartisan process. Finally, as a resident of GA06 I am opposed to the change proposed involving combining north Fulton areas with south Forsyth. The intent there - to disadvantage the seat held by Rep McBath (D) - is obvious and I oppose it. Thank you."

11/5/2021C. Whedbee of Forsyth County
"I think it is very important that we protect all of Georgia's elections from political partisanship on both sides, by instituting a nonpartisan independent commission that draws our district lines. An independent commission protects everyone, whether they are voters or elected officials: it helps ensure a fair vote and helps to remove suspicion of underhanded dealing on the part of our representatives. It really does not make sense to have our distric lines decided by people who are clearly biased."

11/5/2021S. Kramer of Fulton County
"D Walker: I'm sure you were so up in arms when the Democrats did the same thing for over 200 years. Funny, I didn't hear you speak out then. Oh, and did you speak out against IL or NY or CT for the same behavior? Hmmm. And, what's your opinion on the secretive way the US House is rolling out the reconciliation bill? I guess it's a case of selective outrage, huh?"

11/5/2021D. Walker of DeKalb County
"It's unacceptable that maps for a special session to start on a Wednesday are released the previous day. This is not a transparent process, and it doesn't inspire confidence in a fair process."

11/4/2021A. Dennis of Fulton County
"11/4/21 Testimony cont...Reliable and affordable access to the internet is an essential part of ensuring that all voices can be heard in our redistricting process. While many of us take this for granted, including our elected officials in Atlanta, broadband access is a scarcity to the marginalized. If we want to create an inclusive and accessible redistricting process, issues such as broadband access must also be addressed. We strongly encourage the Georgia General Assembly to commit to fair, transparent, and community driven maps that protects communities of Black, Latinx, AAPI, Indigenous and other communities of color who rarely have a seat at the table."

11/4/2021A. Dennis of Fulton County
"11/4/21 Testimony cont..Redistricting works best when people, not political operatives are at the center of the process. That’s why it is essential that (1) there are accessible opportunities for meaningful public input into all the local redistricting processes; and (2) every Georgian pays attention and participates in the local and state redistricting processes. But all things are not equal. In significant parts of Georgia, people lack access to broadband internet. Not only does this make it incredibly difficult to undertake basic life tasks such as scheduling health appointments, but it limits their ability to participate in hearings like the one we are having today. As you know, the maps that are drawn will affect whether our communities receive the resources they need to thrive over the next decade."

11/4/2021A. Dennis of Fulton County
"11/4/21 Testimony cont..Impact of Proposed Maps on Select Cities: Accordingly, the impact of redistricting on these communities is about more than just immediate resources and political power; it is about building toward better representation in the future. To determine how the proposed maps would impact Georgia communities, we took a closer look at four municipalities: Lawrenceville, Stonecrest, Newnan, and Fayetteville."

11/4/2021M. Shockey of DeKalb County
"These long slender house districts that have been proposed in South Dekalb certainly splits up long standing communities and creates a disconnect from one neighborhood to another. The carving out of distinct communities in the proposed map, essentially does the same thing. I understand the lines must be drawn, but why not more compact? The numbers are not significantly different - there is no need to do this. Again, on the long districts - that keeps intact communities from working to improve the overall well being of their communities. I also note that several of the smaller cities are chopped up as well. Who does this serve? Not the people who live in these districts. I oppose the map in its current configuration. I also oppose the process for hearings that keeps folks who have day jobs from coming to the capitol or to remote locations from testifying in person. Why not create a more robust hearing mechanism and get more feedback from the community? Weekends should be an option."

11/4/2021A. Dennis of Fulton County
"11/4/21 Testimony cont..Impact of Proposed Maps on Select Cities: At its core, the purpose of redistricting should be to ensure that every Georgian has an equal opportunity to elect a candidate of their choice. This means that, among other things, districts must be mostly equal in population, comply with the Voting Rights Act of 1965, and keep communities whole as much as possible. We know that people’s first connection to politics is at the local level. Decisions made by local elected officials intimately affect every part of our lives. Additionally, local politics is often a stepping stone for emerging leaders. It’s a place for community leaders to run in smaller elections to build their skills and political power in hopes of someday representing their community in the Georgia General Assembly or the U.S. Congress."

11/4/2021A. Dennis of Fulton County
"11/4/21 Testimony cont..Statewide concerns: Especially in cases where voters have been moved from one district to another, we are concerned about increased voter confusion and challenges in election administration. Accordingly, we strongly encourage you to minimize precinct splits to only those that are necessary to achieve substantially equal population."

11/4/2021A. Dennis of Fulton County
"11/4/21 Testimony cont..Statewide concerns: The Georgia General Assembly should, with significant public input from organizations and communities of color, consider whether drawing opportunity districts, coalition districts, or influence districts could ultimately increase the voting power and representation of communities of color who have historically been sidelined or used as pawns in the redistricting process. Second, we are concerned about the impact of splitting voting precincts on election administration and voter experience. As you know, when a precinct is split into multiple districts, election administration becomes more complicated. Voters may be confused about which district they are in, which leads to slower processing times and longer lines. Elections officials need to manage multiple ballots, rather than just one, which again, increases the complexity of their work."

11/4/2021A. Dennis of Fulton County
"11/4/21 Testimony cont..Statewide concerns: First, compliance with Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 is a legally mandatory minimum when adopting new maps. Achieving VRA compliance requires the judicious use of racial data and previous election results in order to conduct a racially polarized voting analysis. We strongly encourage the Georgia General Assembly to make their results of this analysis public. Further, we encourage the Georgia General Assembly to view compliance with the VRA as a floor, not a ceiling, when it comes to ensuring that Indigenous, African-American, Latinx, Asian/Pacific Islander and other communities of color have an equal opportunity to elect candidates of their choice."

11/4/2021A. Dennis of Fulton County
"11/4/21 Testimony cont..For purposes of our testimony today, given the short amount of time available for analysis, Common Cause focused on general, statewide concerns, along with a deeper understanding of how the proposed district lines impacted four cities: Lawrenceville, Stonecrest, Newnan, and Fayetteville. In each of these cities, district lines divide up the cities and the communities contained within them. These divisions will intimately impact not only the voting experience of Georgians in those communities (who they can vote for, where their polling places are), but will also impact the representation and resources available to them."

11/4/2021A. Dennis of Fulton County
"11/4/21 Testimony cont..While we appreciate that you held hearings before the maps were drawn, today’s hearing is the only opportunity for Georgians to testify on the proposed maps. These proposed maps were released less than three days ago, several hours after they were promised, and during a time when most Georgians were focused on something else, which provides insufficient time for advocates and members of the public to fully analyze the maps in order to provide you with meaningful comments. Further, our understanding is that these maps are slated to be voted on tomorrow which does not give you, as members of the General Assembly, sufficient time to digest and incorporate the public feedback that you are receiving today."

11/4/2021A. Dennis of Fulton County
"11/4/21 Testimony cont.. We are deeply concerned that the patterns of the past are repeating themselves in 2021. The maps that have been presented solidify racial voter polarization while impacting precinct allocations. This is very harmful when we look toward the 2024 election. Mapping lines should not be used to manipulate local delegations to secure future federal wins. This is particularly concerning given the fact that preclearance is no longer in effect, which means that there is no mechanism to check the Georgia General Assembly maps prior to enactment. This is further exacerbated by the way this redistricting process has moved forward."

11/4/2021A. Dennis of Fulton County
"11/4/21 Testimony cont.. Here in Georgia, the white population decreased by .96% with an overall state population falling from 55.88% to 50.06%. However, Fulton County has experienced an increase in gentrification as more whites move from rural areas to the Atlanta metropolitan areas, and Hispanics now make up 10% of Georgia’s population. These significant demographic changes must be represented in the final, enacted voting maps."

11/4/2021A. Dennis of Fulton County
"11/4/21 Testimony cont...In addition to the partisan machinations of previous redistricting cycles, there has also been a sustained and historical attempt to silence the voices of voters of color, particularly African-American voters. This has been accomplished by intentionally diluting African-American voting strength, particularly in districts that are held by African-American elected officials. Vote dilution most commonly occurs when those who draw redistricting plans compress minority communities into a small number of districts (packing) or spread them thinly into a large number of districts (cracking or splitting). Cracking and Packing has become a huge concern in cities of Lawrenceville, and Stonecrest, with Richmond, Muscogee, Fulton, Henry, and Cobb Counties having the most “cracked” state house districts."

11/4/2021A. Dennis of Fulton County
"My name is Aunna Dennis and I am the Executive Director of Common Cause Georgia. For decades, Common Cause has advocated on behalf of our members, supporters, and all Georgians for a fair, transparent, accessible redistricting process that results in truly representative maps. Redistricting in Georgia has historically been conducted in a secretive process, where the interests of partisan operatives and party leaders were prioritized over the interests of everyday Georgians. We deserve better. It is past time for Georgia to come together and demand fair and transparent maps that don’t divide our communities and dilute our voting power."

11/4/2021D. Shendelman of DeKalb County
"In drawing new boundaries for our elected representatives, these maps take us backwards in partisan representation, backwards in minority representation and splits communities of interest (the House map splits up 63% of small cities that could fit into one House district). The maps should not be drawn for partisan gain, but that's exactly what you've done, in some instances splitting districts which already contained the desired number of constituents. Of particular concern to me is splitting Dunwoody into two State House Districts. We are one community of interest and should remain in one district as that is in our best interest of being served well at the State level."

11/4/2021J. P of Fulton County
"Keep Forsyth County OUT of the 6th District! It's mostly rural and white, which hardly has anything in common with diverse and Democratic Cobb, N. Fulton, and N. DeKalb."

11/4/2021C. Walker of DeKalb County
"Please drop partisanship and draw maps that reflect the population and will of the people. Concerns include: map makers having a personal stake in the outcome of the process, the partisan and demographic makeup of the mapmaking body, the degree of public access to data and materials used in drawing maps, opportunities for the public to have meaningful input in the process and whether there is a process for holding mapmakers accountable, exclusion of minority reps input. In the Senate, 10 of the committee’s 15 members are Republicans. In the House, 13 of 18 are members of the GOP. Transparency in this process is deeply lacking."

11/4/2021C. Brown of Cherokee County
"I have read through many of the comments on this board and it appears unlike myself, many have not actually studied maps on the damaging effect it will have moving forward. These maps were drawn to hurt conservative voters and those wanting to run to represent their voters. The fact that the house's GOP majority will be smaller is a testament to the deal making done under the dome. This map will not only kill Cherokee county as a conservative stronghold, it will turn GA blue. I am not intereseted in living in a blue state. This map is unacceptable in every way."

11/4/2021L. Jones of Cherokee County
"The House Rep. map proposal of October 29 was a strong map for keeping our County intact and let us have a voice in how we are governed. Not sure what happened in session that led to the proposal on November 2 where you carved up Cherokee into 9 districts. This is not acceptable to the people of Cherokee County. We do not want our County carved up and handed to people that do not live in our communities. Was this putative, or a desperate need for sitting Reps in purple areas who need to keep their seats to carve out a little red area of our County for themselves. Go back to 10/29 proposal."

11/4/2021C. Baumann of Fulton County
"On behalf of the members of SEIU -Workers United Southern Region today I denounce the proposed state legislative maps proposed by the Republicans. Both the state House and Senate proposals are clearly another attempt to disenfranchise and weaken the voices of our Black and brown communities. Georgia grew by more than one million people over the past decade and is one of the most diverse states in the country. People of color make up 100% of this growth as the non-Hispanic White population of the state decreased by 1%. SEIU members, worker leaders in the Fight for $15 and a Union and our allies will not let self-interested politicians carve up our communities for their own benefit. We will continue to speak out for fair representation to make our communities whole and deliver what our families need for decades to come."

11/4/2021A. Shiffman of Cobb County
"Lines should be drawn along major thoroughfares and not gerrymandered to keep a particular are R or D. I am currently in US House 06, State House 43, State Senate 33, & School Bd Post 5 and on ""the border"" so I suspect my home will be moved to different diatricts, because that is what the State does...and it is wrong. I also wish our school board lines will be put back into feeder patterns. I amntired of my house being in a Post and my children go to school in a different post so I cannot vote for school board rep who represents the schools my childen go to. School Board should be non-partisan...children are not partisan...and if it was non-partisan then feeder pattern lines could be followed instead of trying to keep Posts R or D. Do what is the right thing to do...make the lines have sense and not all over the place..dividing neighborhoods."

11/4/2021M. Blackmon of DeKalb County
"Please reread the comments made to you by Georgia citizens at the public hearings around the state and do a much better job of incorporating those requests. In the maps, which you finally released this week just before the Braves game, you do not reflect those requests to keep communities of interest together. It is extremely disappointing to see how many small cities you have continued to split into multiple Senate and House districts. As citizens of Georgia, we expect you to be more honest and fair."

11/4/2021D. Tisdale of DeKalb County
"I am advocating for my community, Decatur, to be kept together as a Community of Interest. Where my school resides is divided into two different Congressional Districts and State House Districts. Currently, my community is situated in Congressional Districts 5 and 6, State House Districts 83 and 84, and State Senate District 42. This split encourages my community of new and young voters to be apathetic to our democratic process. Compensating for our differences in representation, it is difficult to believe that our distinct community issues are being looked upon if that same issue is being tackled by a completely different representative. Allowing our community to be conglomerated into a single district at both the Congressional and State House levels, we will be uniquely represented with the issues we may have. College students must have the opportunity to elect representatives who will understand and advocate for their unique concerns."

11/4/2021E. Azize of Fulton County
"I am advocating for my community, Clark Atlanta University, to be kept together as a Community of Interest. I am a student at Clark Atlanta University and have seen my college community be affected by the split in districts for several years. My school sits on Atlanta Student Movement Blvd, a street that is famous for its participation in the Civil Rights Movement that created rights for racial minority groups in the 60s. Currently, my community is situated in Congressional District 5, State House Districts 56 and 57, and State House Districts 36 and 39. My community is split between multiple districts at the State House and State Senate levels. As a result, while some of the student population vote nearby, others have to travel a greater distance to find their assigned polling place. Because students who live in the same community are assigned to different districts, it means different representatives, different ballots, and different polling places."

11/4/2021B. Daniell of DeKalb County
The process for creating these maps has been too fast and does not allow for appropriate public comment or consideration of those comments. The lack of competitive districts is disheartening in a time when so many people are engaged in the political process. We should aim to reflect the demographics of our current communities and protect those communities historically exploited. Slow down the process and take all public comment into account and allow us visibility into the proposed maps with enough time to review and make an informed decision.

11/4/2021N. Jemmott of Fulton County
"The proposed state senate map fails to recognize the diversity of Georgia revealed in the 2020 Census, lacks the partisan balance evident from recent election cycles, lacks a reasonable number of competitive districts, and lacks transparency (Tuesday release before Wednesday committee meeting). Ultimately, voters are being denied the opportunity to choose their representatives. The redistricting process needs to be revised to allow the committee more time to hear from and respond to public comments, and redraw an equitable map."

11/4/2021M. Seger of Cobb County
"Transparency in this process is deeply lacking. Creating maps without input from minority party committee members is not democracy, it is silencing the voices of those communities. Please listen to the people, look at the guidelines created by the Princeton Gerrymandering Project and Fair Districts GA. The Princeton Gerrymandering Project used math models to create a million maps based on census data, adherence to Voting Rights Act criteria, keeping the 290 communities of interest together to the extent possible, minimizing splitting small to medium size cities etc The State Senate map proposed by the GOP members of the committee earned a grade of F based on the data based model range criteria. While the minority party caucus draft map earned an A. We couldn't be further apart here, this map in particular needs further discussion and work."

11/4/2021A. Dougherty of DeKalb County
Please follow the Princeton Gerrymandering Project as you manipulate districts. Look at representation-not vote imbalance. Put power aside to create competitive districts that best represent the change in population....We are watching carefully...so far-not all good....listen and go back to the drawing board. Use this interactive map https://fairdistrictsga.github.io/Georgia-Explorer/

11/4/2021S. Chavis of Fulton County
"I am not in favor of these proposed maps. They are drawn to favor one party over another and do not fairly represent all the people of Georgia or the state’s changing racial demographics. This will lead to unbalanced representation at every level of government. Go back to the drawing board, collaborate equally and above board with members of both parties, and allow generous time for public input."

11/4/2021M. Cureton of Fulton County
"The purpose of having government representatives elected is to provide people with a qualified representative. What the GOP has done with this set of proposed districts is undermine and in some cases destroy the ability for marginalized communities and communities of color to have a voice at the state level, so that they have a better opportunity to improve their way of life. I live in Roswell and used to be an SD-56. A wonderful woman ran for that seat last year. She did very well but still lost. In order to punish her and to punish us, her district has been redrawn. If she were to run, she will no longer have support from like-minded people but now would have to run and garner votes from much less diverse and geographically less accessible areas. These maps are drawn as a reflection of self-interested elected officials who are not at all focused on the needs of the people. Shame on you."

11/4/2021D. Mitton of Madison County
"How about maps that actually represent REAL Georgia - you know, the largely black, LGBT and non-white-supremacist Georgia not reflected in the lie that is mostly conservative Republican gerrymandering?"

11/4/2021R. Nosari of Fulton County
The proposed GOP maps are undemocratic and are explicitly undermining the will of the people. The proposed map clearly undermines voter representation by disproportionately advantaging Republican votes instead of striving for fair and equal representation. Our American ideal of democracy is in peril due to partisan games like this. Please reconsider the map and submit one that will enfranchise voters as much more proportionately.

11/4/2021K. Kroll of Cobb County
"We want fair maps! Georgia is a diverse state and this diversity is one of our strengths. The maps must reflect that. Once again, the GOP is trying to rush the process. Give the people time to submit input."

11/4/2021J. Parker of Clayton County
"As a Public Citizen, It has come to my attention that you are fast tracking the redistricting process. It is obvious that you no longer allow for the people to participate in the legislation of the law that would affect our right to vote in our district without the legislature fighting for all of Georgians. This is an obvious game to push this change of the districts that will put the Republicans into the best place for their gain. This does not benefit the Freedom and my voice as a patriot of this state and country. This needs to be shelved until ""We the People"" have had time to speak Up....."

11/3/2021J. Markwell of Fulton County
"Georgia grew by over a million people in recent years, but the current district draft maps don't reflect the largest group in that growth: people of color! It's obvious that although Georgia Republicans talk the talk about democracy, they don't walk that walk. America isn't a party, it's a Constitution and our adherence to the Rule of Law laid out in that document. Politicians should remember their history, not the part about 3/5ths and then use it as a model, but the part about ""The right of citizens of the United States to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account of race, color, or previous condition of servitude."" Joel Markwell Atlanta, GA"

11/3/2021L. Bell of DeKalb County
"When a state has grown, according to the census, predominantly because of new residents who are largely people of color, the redrawn map must reflect that. The map being considered does not do so."

11/3/2021C. Corbitt of DeKalb County
"The GOP proposed Senate map fails to fairly reflect GA’s diversity. While politically motivated Gerrymandering isn't unconstitutional, minimizing the voice of minorities is. The results of the census prove that Georgia is becoming more diverse, yet the proposed boundaries misrepresent our diverse state in clearly partisan and biased ways."

11/3/2021J. Williamson of Athens-Clarke County
"Clarke County is the smallest county in the state. However, in the state house district draft, it is split into four districts, and it is split into two districts in the state senate district draft. In the region, it is uniquely urban. It is also a very diverse area within the surrounding counties with a large proportion of African Americans and a large proportion of Hispanics. It is also the location of UGA, which is clearly a unique community in the state. By splitting ACC and grouping it with distinctly different counties, it dilutes the voice of the county across multiple districts. Each representative has less of a duty to advocate for Clarke County and its unique needs within each district. ACC may thereby be underrepresented in the state legislature. I and others from Athens-Clarke County ask that the state house and senate redistricting maps be drawn to minimize splitting ACC. One way may be done by respecting the historical boundary of Clarke with Oconee."

11/3/2021M. Anderson of Fulton County
"Having multiple political districts covering one small neighborhood would cause confusion as well as a dearth of inefficiencies. Having ONE district for the entire neighborhood would maintain much-needed clarity and efficiency for the many residents who call Piedmont Heights home. We realize Piedmont Heights is a small neighborhood. And yet, Piedmont Heights is one of Atlanta’s oldest neighborhoods, being settled in 1822 – even before Atlanta’s predecessor Terminus in 1837. We wish to remain unified – as a community and via our political districting. Vote to keep the Piedmont Heights neighborhood unified in our political representation. One community, one district!"

11/3/2021G. Burdell of Floyd County
Why is the neighborhood in Stonebridge split between two senate districts? Wouldn't it make more sense to have it all in district 53?

11/2/2021R. Graham of Douglas County
"A criminal defrauded the election sitting in the Secretary of States seat. He made illegal deals to abridge voters. He oversaw election materials illegally ordered through a foreign company, Shopify. He allowed ballots to be illegally shreaded from the video. The legislature illegally refuses to stand for voters and voting rights. The state AG refuses to protect constitutional voting rights. The US Federal Government is taking our Constitutional rights, murdering the citizens with a federally funded biological weapon, had treatments withheald by the government, had citizens thrown in prison without due process, and your priorities lie in obfuscated districts? God will judge all of you that refused to help honesty and ritiousness. To those of you talking about ""white Republicans and people of color Democrats"", I know far more rich white Democrats pushing DNC slavery yet all the people of color I know vote conservative."

11/2/2021D. Aneteneh of Fulton County
"Redistricting is a crucial part of our democracy. For that reason, a fair, transparent, and democratic process should be considered crucial as well. To aid the legislature in drawing fair district maps, Fair Count has conducted more than 90 community mapping events to facilitate public input. We ask that you all seriously consider the input gathered on Representable. Due to the character limit for this portal, we are sending the committee a letter explaining community mapping and Representable. Please consult that letter and the following link to view the nearly 400 community maps and testimonies created so far by communities across Georgia. https://www.representable.org/"

11/2/2021C. Alexander of Thomas County
"The Georgia House Redistricting Committee released guidelines in 2011 for both congressional and state legislative districts following the 2010 Census: 1. Contiguity 2. Compactness 3. Communities of shared interest 4. One member per district This year, however, since SCOTUS gutted the Voting Rights Act of 1965 in 2013, what would be the intent for legislatures to overlook any of these 2011 guidelines henceforth? Particularly, the likelihood that the GOP to stack incumbent Democrats into the same House and Senate districts during this year’s redistricting process is a problem. In addition, given Gov. Kemp’s late call for the General Assembly this year, this means that potential compromised candidates are unable to consider a run elsewhere due to residency requirements. Heil Putinism! No longer the pretense of the goal of a representative democracy … If one can not win on merit_ then lie, cheat, and steal."

11/1/2021M. Cullins of Macon-Bibb County
"I am almost lost for words to know we are still living in the Jim Crowe Era, but with a different outlook. to Me, its still the same. The redistricting's are to hurt the Black voters and discourage us from voting. I must say, there is not anything happens that last forever. We as a community pay taxes, shop in the stores, and some of us attends their Ministries; yet some of them are the ones supporting the call for Redistricting. If it`s not broken , WHY FIXIT. STOP CHEATING WE ARE TIRED OF BEING SHOVED AROUND THROUGH THE: IT WONT HAPPEN AGAIN: THE BIBLE SAYS, WHEN HE (JESUS) IS FOR US, HE IS MORE THAN THE WHOLE WORLD AGAINST US. SO WE ARE MORE THAN CONQUERS. IN MY CLOSING, BE NOT TRICKED; GOD IS NOT MADE SPORT OF: FOREVER SEED A MAN PUTS IN, THAT WILL HE GET BACK AS GRAIN."

11/1/2021P. McKibben of Macon-Bibb County
"I just finished reading “Turning Point” which is about Jimmy Carters first run for office in 1962. When he ran, the SCOTUS had just ruled against Georgia's County Unit System of voting (Gray v. Sanders). I wont go into all the details of that system (google it), but basically it corrupted the voting system by Party Strongmen Bosses “delivering” votes as needed. In a historic verdict the SCOTUS mandated one person, one vote. It struck me that after 60 years, today's politicians picking their own voters, instead of what it should be (the other way around), is no better that the County Unit system. Back then it was good ole boys padding the vote. Today it's.....Still Party Bosses corrupting elections. We the people are being shuffled like playing cards, and with a little “slight of hand” those good old boy/girls, are using new tricks to draw district maps that are nothing but a FRAUD on the people. One good thing though. We the people now have access to those same 21st century tools"

11/1/2021M. Martin of Gwinnett County
"We Georgians should be included in the redistricing process! We MUST have the opportunitey to see the proposed maps and comment on them. After all, we're the ones being redistricted!"

11/1/2021J. Jones of Carroll County
"o Whom It May Concern: My name is Justin Jones and I am a Junior at The University of West Georgia. I have studied, worked, and lived in the Carrollton area for four years, and I have lived in the state of Georgia for eight years. I am also a Democracy Fellow with Fair Elections Center’s Campus Vote Project, an organization that is empowering college students to make their voices heard as part of their state’s redistricting process. I am advocating for my community, University of West Georgia, to be kept together as a Community of Interest. The University of West Georgia is the largest higher education institution in the general area and, in fact, it is one of only a few four-year institutions in our Congressional District and in our State House and State Senate Districts. Currently, my community is situated in Congressional District 3, State House Districts 18 and 69, and State Senate District 30. It is important to keep the University of West Georgia together in both the Congressi"

11/1/2021N. Pettersen of DeKalb County
I support the revised fair redistricting map proposed by Georgia Senate Democrats. Voting should be a reflection of who we are as a people. Having our vote count is a sacred right for which people have died.

11/1/2021B. Jenkins of Rockdale County
"We submit our Official Testimony and Proposal for Redistricting Rockdale County, GA. The proposed map has been submitted via email to the Reapportionment Office and is incorporated herein by reference. Our Proposal creates a district which is 100% in Rockdale. We need a Representative who is wholly focused on the needs and priorities of our community. In addition, our map eliminates split precincts. We propose three districts for the 93,570 people of Rockdale as follows: District 1 = New House District 91, Pop. 54,662 [Barksdale, Fieldstone, Flat Shoals, Honey Creek, Lorraine, Magnet, Rockdale, Smyrna, St. Pius, Stanton Precincts] District 2 = New House District 92, Pop. In Rockdale 33,972 [Conyers, Hightower, The Lakes, Milstead, Olde Town Precincts] and portions of DeKalb County District 3 = New House District 114, Pop. In Rockdale 4,936 [Bethel Precinct] and portions of Walton County."

11/1/2021B. Jenkins of Rockdale County
"We submit our Official Testimony and Proposal for Redistricting Rockdale County, GA. The proposed map has been submitted via email to the Reapportionment Office and is incorporated herein by reference. Our Proposal creates a district which is 100% in Rockdale. We need a Representative who is wholly focused on the needs and priorities of our community. In addition, our map eliminates split precincts. We propose three districts for the 93,570 people of Rockdale as follows: District 1 = New House District 91, Pop. 54,662 [Barksdale, Fieldstone, Flat Shoals, Honey Creek, Lorraine, Magnet, Rockdale, Smyrna, St. Pius, Stanton Precincts] District 2 = New House District 92, Pop. In Rockdale 33,972 [Conyers, Hightower, The Lakes, Milstead, Olde Town Precincts] and portions of DeKalb County District 3 = New House District 114, Pop. In Rockdale 4,936 [Bethel Precinct] and portions of Walton County."

10/31/2021R. Ridgeway of Rockdale County
"We submit our Official Testimony and Proposal for Redistricting Rockdale County, GA. The proposed map has been submitted via email to the Reapportionment Office and is incorporated herein by reference. Our Proposal creates a district which is 100% in Rockdale. We need a Representative who is wholly focused on the needs and priorities of our community. In addition, our map eliminates split precincts. We propose three districts for the 93,570 people of Rockdale as follows: District 1 = New House District 91, Pop. 54,662 [Barksdale, Fieldstone, Flat Shoals, Honey Creek, Lorraine, Magnet, Rockdale, Smyrna, St. Pius, Stanton Precincts] District 2 = New House District 92, Pop. In Rockdale 33,972 [Conyers, Hightower, The Lakes, Milstead, Olde Town Precincts] and portions of DeKalb County District 3 = New House District 114, Pop. In Rockdale 4,936 [Bethel Precinct] and portions of Walton County."

10/31/2021S. Kramer of Fulton County
"S. Ouweleen: Funny, I didn't here you griping about this from 1790-2000. Let's give the GOP the same timeframe - that's another definition of fairness, don't ya think? Only once you're in the minority do you squeal and want things changed. My advice: take your complaints to IL, NY, and CT, and once you get them to be ""fair"", come back here and we'll talk."

10/31/2021S. Ouweleen of DeKalb County
"I'm a Dekalb County resident. The results of the most recent census show that the demographics in Georgia are changing. A just and nonpartisan redistricting process should reflect these changes and guarantee that all Georgians are fairly represented in both state and federal government. Stop the gerrymandering,voters should choose their representatives, not the other way around!"

10/31/2021A. Giese of Camden County
It is essential for Camden County's voice to be heard in Atlanta to have all of the county in one state district. The is no logical justification to have this small county divided up.

10/31/2021C. Latham of Coffee County
"Most Georgians know you all only care about the metro areas, but many of us do not like how you carve up our districts to benefit the metro areas. Every time you all redraw, our county has gone from the 1st district to the 12th and now you are proposing the 8th. Leave us alone down here and fix your own districts in metro areas. Let us stay where we have been!! Oh, and get rid of SB 202. You screwed up there as well!"

10/31/2021S. Kramer of Fulton County
"I don't recall reading about ""political trends"" in the constitution. If it's so critical, where was your voice in 1790-2000? Or IL today? Or CT? Or NY? Ye doth protest too much. Let the GOP handle reapportionment like the Democrats did for 200 years here, without a peep from you. In another 200 years, we'll revisit your concerns."

10/30/2021V. Manson of DeKalb County
"The proposed GOP Congressional map does not reflect recent political trends. In recent statewide elections, voters went slightly Republican in 2018 and slightly Democratic in 2020. We are a 50-50 state. An apportionment of 7-R and 7-D or 8-R and 6-D districts more accurately captures our political preferences than the 9R-5D proposal. The process used by the Committees has been neither open nor transparent: hearings were held only before the census data were published, no criteria are being given for changes to the districts and no public hearings on the proposed map are planned. This is a map that ignores voters’ preferences derived from a process which denies meaningful voter input."

10/30/2021S. Kramer of Fulton County
"E. Davis: So, I looked up Princeton Gerrymandering to see who funds it. It's Eric Schmidt (Schmidt Futures), the ex-Google CEO. He's a leftist. Like other leftist High Tech company heads, they've inserted themselves into our political scene. The infamous drop boxes, places overwhelmingly in big Democrat areas, was funded by high tech kings. It's also funded by the Simons Foundation, from a woke kids of a hedge fund person. These are also leftists. They give to Green New Deal types of causes, LGBT, etc. Would Princeton Gerrymandering be ""fair"" to both sides? I think not. Just because an organization is non-partisan, non-profit, doesn't mean they don't have an agenda. This one is clear."

10/30/2021E. Davis of DeKalb County
"Following the 2020 US Census the demographics of Georgia are now about evenly split between white people and people of color. However, the State Senate’s reapportionment and redistricting committee consists of 15 white males and only 5 senators of color. There are at least 18 people of color in the Georgia State Senate. Why isn’t the composition of this committee more representative of Georgia’s demographics? Is this denying people of color an equal opportunity to participate in governing (viz., reapportionment and drawing district maps that will affect voting for the next 10 years)? Is this denying Georgia voters of maps that could be fairer?"

10/30/2021E. Davis of DeKalb County
"Let’s look at facts not hyperbole about fairness. Princeton Gerrymandering is a non-profit, non-partisan organization that evaluates ALL district maps being generated by ALL 50 states. They have given a C rating for fairness to the Congressional map drawn by GA legislative redistricting committees and a B rating for the Congressional map drawn by GA Democratic legislators. See for yourself: https://gerrymander.princeton.edu/redistricting-report-card/?planId=recQWnjf3WNpE8ZlC and https://gerrymander.princeton.edu/redistricting-report-card/?planId=rec3HPPnyULf426wZ"

10/30/2021S. Kramer of Fulton County
"I note the word ""fair"" is bounced around here relentlessly. Why aren't these ""fairness groups"" not concentrating, nor even appearing, in CT, NY, IL, and other states? I'll tell you why. They are cover for Democrat-funded groups that Stacey Abrams seeds and grows, to upset the character of GA. If they are indeed beholden to fairness, let them stop gerrymandering in CT, NY, and IL during this decennial cycle, and we can revisit GA during the next. Crickets from the left on this one. Don't be fooled!"

10/30/2021C. Williams of Cobb County
"I am reaching out to all the members of the Georgia joint redistricting committee to ensure that fair lines are drawn in Cherokee, Cobb, and Fulton counties. Specifically, I am requesting that the CD6 maintains its current composition of east Cobb, north Fulton, and north DeKalb counties. The state senate's proposed map with the exclusion of Dekalb and adding Forsyth County does not maintain the communities of interest, nor would it reflect the diverse needs of the current district. The census shows that CD6 can maintain the current diverse population and maintain its existing lines. In essence, DONT FIX THE 6! Overall, I want fair maps that respect communities of interest, are compact, and are contiguous. I support moving the future Georgia redistricting process to a nonpartisan commission. I want transparency and public involvement in the process."

10/30/2021A. Jordan of Cobb County
"I am reaching out to all the members of the Georgia joint redistricting committee to ensure that fair lines are drawn in Cherokee, Cobb, and Fulton counties. Specifically, I am requesting that the CD6 maintains its current composition of east Cobb, north Fulton, and north DeKalb counties. The state senate's proposed map with the exclusion of Dekalb and adding Forsyth County does not maintain the communities of interest, nor would it reflect the diverse needs of the current district. The census shows that CD6 can maintain the current diverse population and maintain its existing lines. In essence, DONT FIX THE 6! Overall, I want fair maps that respect communities of interest, are compact, and are contiguous. I support moving the future Georgia redistricting process to a nonpartisan commission. I want transparency and public involvement in the process."

10/30/2021O. Joledo of Gwinnett County
"I am reaching out to all the members of the Georgia joint redistricting committee to ensure that fair lines are drawn in Cherokee, Cobb, and Fulton counties. Specifically, I am requesting that the CD6 maintains its current composition of east Cobb, north Fulton, and north DeKalb counties. The state senate's proposed map with the exclusion of Dekalb and adding Forsyth County does not maintain the communities of interest, nor would it reflect the diverse needs of the current district. The census shows that CD6 can maintain the current diverse population and maintain its existing lines. In essence, DONT FIX THE 6! Overall, I want fair maps that respect communities of interest, are compact, and are contiguous. I support moving the future Georgia redistricting process to a nonpartisan commission. I want transparency and public involvement in the process."

10/30/2021S. Roberts of Fulton County
"I am reaching out to all the members of the Georgia joint redistricting committee to ensure that fair lines are drawn in Cherokee, Cobb, and Fulton counties. Specifically, I am requesting that the CD6 maintains its current composition of east Cobb, north Fulton, and north DeKalb counties. The state senate's proposed map with the exclusion of Dekalb and adding Forsyth County does not maintain the communities of interest, nor would it reflect the diverse needs of the current district. The census shows that CD6 can maintain the current diverse population and maintain its existing lines. In essence, DONT FIX THE 6! Overall, I want fair maps that respect communities of interest, are compact, and are contiguous. I support moving the future Georgia redistricting process to a nonpartisan commission. I want transparency and public involvement in the process."

10/30/2021J. Gray of Fulton County
"I am reaching out to all the members of the Georgia joint redistricting committee to ensure that fair lines are drawn in Cherokee, Cobb, and Fulton counties. Specifically, I am requesting that the CD6 maintains its current composition of east Cobb, north Fulton, and north DeKalb counties. The state senate's proposed map with the exclusion of Dekalb and adding Forsyth County does not maintain the communities of interest, nor would it reflect the diverse needs of the current district. The census shows that CD6 can maintain the current diverse population and maintain its existing lines. In essence, DONT FIX THE 6! Overall, I want fair maps that respect communities of interest, are compact, and are contiguous. I support moving the future Georgia redistricting process to a nonpartisan commission. I want transparency and public involvement in the process."

10/29/2021J. P of Fulton County
"Please for the love of God, enact an independent commission. The maps that have been proposed so far aren't good. We need a realistic 7-7 party split delegation. This is a bright purple state. Think about all of the Democrats in red states and all of the Republicans in blue states. Is it fair that their voices are silenced? It must be proportional."

10/29/2021K. Fletcher of Fulton County
"The redistricting process should prioritize transparency and fairness. Like many other states, Georgia's previous district maps gave a distinct advantage to Republicans. Instead, districts should be made to be as competitive as possible to ensure that candidates actually have to be accountable to their constituents. Regardless, this process should be as transparent and accountable to the public as possible. In the future, a truly independent commission should be used to draw maps."

10/29/2021C. Battles of Fulton County
"As a resident of Georgia and an employee of an organization whose mission is educating and empowering voters, I am really proud of this tool. I hope that you can use it in drawing fair, non-partisan maps that ensure voters' voices are heard. Thank you. http://georgiaunitymaps.org/"

10/29/2021S. Kramer of Fulton County
"To M. McCloskey: We may need a woman of color, although I always adhered to ""content of character"", not ""color of skin"". We don't need THAT person in Congress. She is anti-2nd Amendment and will go along with the inflation-building BBB bill that allows the border invasion to continue. Where is she on CRT? It's supplanting our education system, where we should have more STEM concentration, and instead it's a communist philosophy. So, we don't need her. She can go. If reapportionment gets rid of her, it's a success. Let's get off our high-horses and admit that when it was Democrat gerrymandering, the left was silent and happy. No? Look at IL now. They're not up in arms there, are they? So, let the GOP decide the process as the Democrats do in IL and let the chips fall where they may."

10/29/2021D. Garcia of Gwinnett County
"The GALEO Latino Community Development Fund is proud to announce that we have issued proposed unity redistricting maps and data for Georgia’s Congressional, State Senate and State House districts. Since 2004, the white percentage of the Georgia electorate has steadily decreased while the percentage of the minority electorate has steadily increased. As a result, people of color in Georgia now comprise almost half of the total population of the state. Our proposed maps, which adhere to the Georgia General Assembly’s redistricting principles, with a particular interest in adherence to the Voting Rights Act of 1965, give Georgia’s voters of color a meaningful opportunity to elect candidates of choice. Our proposed maps demonstrate that the creation of redistricting plans where Georgians of color have an equal opportunity to elect candidates of choice is possible without partisan or racial gerrymandering. To see the maps and associated files, please visit: www.GeorgiaUnityMaps.org"

10/29/2021S. Kramer of Fulton County
"Responding to L. Denzin: While I think the maps need tweaking, I'm OK with them in general. And, I'm glad you noticed NOW that the Democrats for 200 years gerrymandered. So, give the GOP their 200 years, and we'll then go to a commission. Where were you before 2010 in your disapproval? Yeah, things went your way so there was no need to complain. Have you complained about gerrymandering in IL? All these comments about fairness pop out because these people aren't in the majority anymore. When they were in the majority, it was ""crickets"" on gerrymandering. I know, I was in the minority then. I'm not in the least persuaded in their ""moral"" pleas, because their silence before 2010 spoke loudly. So, to our legislators, do what you have to do, but just keep in mind your own guidelines. If a comment here speaks to you not adhering to your guideline, please fix those concerns. If, instead, it's a matter of ""fairness"", please consider the writers' silence until the GOP took control. Faux outrage"

10/29/2021M. McCloskey of DeKalb County
"Part 2 Because the redistricting committees have not been transparent, we are left to assume that the purpose of this district is to create one more red district in a state that is clearly purple, and to pit two outstanding female representatives against one another, one of them a woman of color whom we very much need in our congress. It is unnecessary to redraw the 6th and 7th districts to take into account census changes in Georgia nor to assure minority opportunity for representation. We believe that redistricting should be fair, transparent, and respect voters wishes. We do not think it is fair that one party’s political priorities should determine our districts. Please listen to us and revise this map. Thank you."

10/29/2021M. McCloskey of DeKalb County
"Part 1 I’ve been a resident of Briarcliff Woods East in unincorporated DeKalb County since 1984. I have been a voter in the 6th US district for many years now, though districts have certainly been moved around while I have lived here. I’m speaking tonight to express my concern with the Georgia legislature’s draft congressional map. I find serious flaws in both the contents of the map and the process of its creation. The proposed map removes my community from the. 6th congressional district and into the 4th. I am concerned by the map, which appears to give less representation to minority voters by packing them into the 4th while cracking them into the 6th adding a large number of mostly white voters from Forsyth County. My community doesn’t like this redrawn map. We want to remain in a district with a representative we know and respect. We also don’t like the fact that the criteria for these changes are unknown."

10/29/2021L. Denzin of Cobb County
"Before submitting my comment, I reviewed dozens of the comments already posted. I did not see a single one that supported the current proposed maps. Are you legislators listening? Do you even care about what your constituents want from this important responsibility? Yes, the Democrats did this for decades in the past. That does not make it right for the current party in power to repeat the same power grab now or in the future. Since our legislators, apparently, cannot put their party's nor their own interests aside for the greater good (as required by law), we voters need to do everything possible to change our redistricting process to one that is fair and non-partisan, representing the will of the voters. I fully support and encourage changing our redistricting process to an independent commission. I cannot find any credible argument for not doing this now so that we can rely on transparency, voter representation, and honesty in 2031."

10/29/2021N. Scott-McFadden of Macon-Bibb County
"District maps should be drawn with fairness to reflect the growth and diversity in Georgia. I reside in the US Congressional 8th District. The current proposed map splits Macon-Bibb into District 2 and District 8. This process better known as ""Cracking"" doesn't and will not allow the citizen of Macon-Bibb to have a cohesive voice or the ability to elect the candidate of their choice. This map divides small portions of North Macon and Sub South Macon into District 8. As a child, my civics teacher taught us that the US Government was designed to allow fair representation for all. Somewhere along the way, our elected government officials have forgotten that they were elected to serve the people, not a political party or themselves. I petition you to put aside your political tactics and do the right thing by drawing district lines that reflects Georgia's diversity. Draw a map that shows that you promote equality, fairness and justice for all Georgians."

10/28/2021C. Pursley of Coweta County
"I support a non-partisan commission to do the redistricting. Georgia clearly showed it is a purple swing state this last election cycle whether some folks like it or not. Having politicians do the redistricting is like letting the fox in the hen house. It is not fair. But then neither was SoS Kemp running his own gubernatorial election. The maps need to reflect the true make up of Georgia's citizens and Georgia's citizens should decide, not politicians who are only looking for their own reelection. I don't care what party is in power. The voters should decide. The map presented by the GOP Senate definitely is gerrymandered and unfair. We need to make the process non-partisan."

10/28/2021C. Pursley of Coweta County
The GOP Senate map packed minority voters in the Atlanta area into GA13 w/75-100% minority voters & only 4 districts w/50-75% minority voters. Most of Georgia’s population growth has been from minority groups. The Senate map does not reflect the increase in the minority population or there would be more minority majority districts. The last election cycle showed Georgia overall is more of a purple state than some want to admit. We need maps that reflect that change. 1 example that really jumped out was the cracking of Fayette Cty. N Fayette has a large minority pop. The county was split into 2 pieces packing minorities in N Fayette into GA13 while S Fayette was put into GA03. Newnan’s HDs in 2010 were split into 3 districts with a tear drop shape moving minority urban voters into HD 132 which is mostly rural diluting minority votes reducing the chances of voters electing the candidate they choose. We need competitive districts & fair representation of communities of interest.

10/28/2021K. Hudon of Union County
"From The Guardian, June 28, 2021. “We have redistricting coming up and the Republicans control most of that process in most states around the country.” Representative Ronnie Jackson told a conference of religious conservatives. “That alone should get us the majority back.” This statement pretty much sums up Republican regard for our democracy. Add to that the fact that Republicans blocked reform of our electoral system and won’t even debate voting rights reform, indicate that Republican law makers don’t give a damn about our country or the American people. It is clear that Republican lawmakers believe it’s ok to win at any cost, even if it costs us our democracy. Well things are changing. Here’s something for you to believe. The filibuster will be shut down. Republican lawmakers and Senator Blabbermouth from Kentucky will no longer oppress minorities. We will reform voting rights. We will end gerrymandering and we will have a country where every citizens voice will be heard."

10/28/2021D. Biemiller of Cobb County
"The proposed redistricting map made by the Republicans is an obvious gerrymander with the intent being to favor Republicans. Until we Georgians ensure fairness by using a non-partisan commission for our redistricting, all efforts should be made to equitably align the proposed districts with our demographics. Georgia is obviously not 65% Republican 35% Democratic."

10/28/2021S. Kramer of Fulton County
"According to your own 2021-2022 Guidelines, item III-A-7-a, you should consider county boundaries. The small bubble of Johns Creek put into CD-7, when the rest of North Fulton is in CD-6, should be fixed ASAP. It's not in line with your guidelines. Additionally, we don't have a community of interest with Gwinnett. Please fix this. Also, note that the comments talking about ""fairness"" didn't seem to be very vocal when Democrats ran the state for over 200 years. Now, for some strange reason, they're vocal. I also don't see them vocal in Illinois and other Democrat run states, where dramatic gerrymandering is going on there. My FAIR solution: Let the GOP do what they're doing for 200 years, to match the Democrats. Then, we can revisit the fairness of redistricting. Isn't that fair? That the GOP have the same stretch of time to redistrict in the same way Democrats did."

10/28/2021K. Lawler of Fulton County
"Fair Districts GA review: Democratic caucus 10/21 Congressional map With 7 districts each for Democrats and Republicans, the proposed map attempts to reflect a nearly equal swing state. However this map fails to reflect the natural distribution of Georgia’s voters in which Democrats are more concentrated than Republicans in urban areas. This map provides one competitive district, GA06, in line with Princeton Gerrymandering Project’s benchmark. Census data shows that all the growth in Georgia’s population is among minorities. Fair maps should provide increased opportunities for minority representation. The current Congressional map provides minorities 9 districts in which to elect candidates of their choice: 4 Black majority districts, 1 minority coalition district and 4 minority influence districts. The Democratic map provides more opportunities for minority representation with 10 districts that are either Black majority, minority-coalition majority, or minority influence districts."

10/28/2021K. Lawler of Fulton County
"Fair Districts GA review: Senate’s 9/27 Congressional map With 5 Dem and 9 GOP-leaning districts, the proposed map favors Republicans while falling within the acceptable statistical range. It suffers from lack of competitiveness and leans unfairly to Republicans considering likely vote-share vs. seat-share outcomes. Census data shows that all the growth in Georgia’s population is among minorities. Fair maps should provide increased opportunities for minority representation. The current Congressional map provides minorities 9 districts in which to elect candidates of their choice: 4 Black majority districts, 1 minority coalition district, and 4 minority influence districts. Blacks and other minorities may be under-represented by the proposed map. The map has a total of 8 districts that provide minority representation, down from 9. Deeper analysis of voting patterns among minority groups is required to determine if these changes do in fact dilute minorities’ voting power."

10/28/2021K. Adams of Decatur County
I strongly support the formation of a non-partisan commission to draw GA voting district maps. And I don’t understand how we are expected to comment when maps are not available for review. Partisans are not able to be fair and responsible. We need a redistricting committee of unelected officials.

10/27/2021P. Sullivan of Chatham County
Special session is next week. Maps for Senate and House haven't been released. So much for time for meaningful review. This is NOT a transparent process.

10/27/2021A. Meisinger of Fulton County
"While understanding that the redistributing process can be complicated, the maps produced must reflect the changing demographics of our state in order to appropriately represent Georgia citizens. Overall, I want fair maps that respect communities of interest, are compact, and are contiguous. I support moving the future Georgia redistricting process to a nonpartisan commission. I want transparency and public involvement in the process."

10/27/2021K. Lawler of Fulton County
"FDGA review: Democratic caucus 10/21 Congressional map With 7 districts each for Democrats and Republicans, the proposed map attempts to reflect a nearly equal swing state. However this map fails to reflect the natural distribution of Georgia’s voters in which Democrats are more concentrated than Republicans in urban area. This map does provide one competitive district, GA06, in line with PGP’s benchmark. Census data shows that all the growth in Georgia’s population is among minorities. Fair maps should provide increased opportunities for minority representation. The current Congressional map provides minorities 9 districts in which to elect candidates of their choice: 4 Black majority districts, 1 minority coalition district and 4 minority influence districts. The Democratic map provides more opportunities for minority representation with 10 districts that are either Black majority, minority-coalition majority, or minority influence districts."

10/27/2021K. Lawler of Fulton County
"FDGA review: Senate’s 9/27 Congressional map With 5 Dem and 9 GOP-leaning districts, the proposed map is a choice that favors Republicans while falling within the acceptable statistical range. It suffers from lack of competitiveness and still leans unfairly to Republicans considering likely vote-share vs. seat-share outcomes. Census data shows that all the growth in Georgia’s population is among minorities. Fair maps should provide increased opportunities for minority representation. The current Congressional map provides minorities 9 districts in which to elect candidates of their choice: 4 Black majority districts, 1 minority coalition district, and 4 minority influence districts. Blacks and other minorities may be under-represented by the proposed map. The map has a total of 8 districts that provide minority representation, down from 9. Deeper analysis of voting patterns among minority groups is required to determine if these changes do in fact dilute minorities’ voting power."

10/27/2021N. Jemmott of Fulton County
"Georgia needs to pass an amendment to the Georgia Constitution to create an independent citizen’s redistricting commission that transfers the responsibility of redistricting from the partisan legislature to an independent commission. The Democracy Act, legislation which has been introduced in the Georgia General Assembly, provides the solution for partisan gerrymandering in Georgia. In the meantime, the congressional map proposed by the Georgia Democrats is fair and legal."

10/27/2021N. Jemmott of Fulton County
"I am reaching out to members of Georgia Joint Redistricting Committee because the draft of the congressional map is alarming and illegal. According to the Voting Rights Act of 1965, people of color must have an equal opportunity to participate in the political process. Moreover, constitutional law dictates “one person, one vote.” Therefore, the results of the 2020 Census indicate the map is racially gerrymandered, and thus unlawful. I am in agreement with Fair Districts GA that maps should respect voters’ political preference, reflect Georgia’s diversity, and honor communities of interest. I am in agreement with the ACLU that there should be transparency on criteria to draw maps, meaningful public input, and the maps should reflect the diversity of the state."

10/27/2021E. Honeycutt of Cherokee County
"The district map proposed by Republicans is not representative. It creates a false 65/35 split, favoring Republicans which is incorrect as evidenced by the results of the 2020 elections."

10/27/2021T. Robinson of Cobb County
"I am requesting that the U.S. Congressional District 6 keeps its current composition of east Cobb, north Fulton, and north DeKalb counties. Adding Forsyth County as proposed does not maintain communities of interest, nor would it reflect the diverse needs of the current district. Overall, I want fair maps that respect communities of interest, are compact, and are contiguous. I support moving the future Georgia redistricting process to a nonpartisan commission. I want transparency and public involvement in the process."

10/27/2021A. Mcgahee jackson of Cobb County
Cobb county redistricting is against my wishes.

10/27/2021A. Davis of DeKalb County
"Subject: Georgia Joint Redistricting Committee, District 6 Dear B. Villnes, My name is Artexas Davis. I reside in Brookhaven. I am reaching out to you and all the members of the Georgia joint redistricting committee to ensure that fair lines are drawn in Cherokee, Cobb, and Fulton counties. Specifically, I am requesting that the U.S. Congressional District 6 keeps its current composition of east Cobb, north Fulton, and north DeKalb counties. Adding Forsyth County as proposed does not maintain communities of interest, nor would it reflect the diverse needs of the current district. Overall, I want fair maps that respect communities of interest, are compact, and are contiguous. I support moving the future Georgia redistricting process to a nonpartisan commission. I want transparency and public involvement in the process. Sincerely, Artexas Davis 1119 Club Trace Brookhaven"

10/26/2021D. C. of Clayton County
We need a fair and just process when it comes to redistricting. Using the correct count from 2020 Census. The republicans are not a fair minded GOP group. The GOP interest is to win by all means. The people of Georgia's eyes are open and will not stand for any more false and fake justices. The time has come to listen to the people!

10/26/2021E. Johnson of Cobb County
"I am reaching out to all the members of the Georgia joint redistricting committee to ensure that fair lines are drawn in Cherokee, Cobb, and Fulton counties. Specifically, I am requesting that the CD6 maintains its current composition of east Cobb, north Fulton, and north DeKalb counties. The state senate's proposed map with the exclusion of Dekalb and adding Forsyth County does not maintain the communities of interest, nor would it reflect the diverse needs of the current district. The census shows that CD6 can maintain the current diverse population and maintain its existing lines. In essence, DONT FIX THE 6! Overall, I want fair maps that respect communities of interest, are compact, and are contiguous. I support moving the future Georgia redistricting process to a nonpartisan commission. I want transparency and public involvement in the process."

10/26/2021S. Sallee of Grady County
"Georgia's population has become ever more diverse over the past several years, and the reapportionment maps should reflect that diversity. ALL Georgians have the right to be fairly represented by their elected officials, and that can only be achieved if voting districts are determined in a transparent, fair, nonpartisan manner. To quote my Congressman Sanford Bishop, ""Georgia voters should choose their representatives, not the other way around...” The results of the last Presidential election and run-off for Georgia's two Senate seats showed clearly that Georgia is much more diverse, and what has been proposed by a Republican majority is clearly gerrymandering to create a voting climate more favorable to them. Georgians deserve better."

10/26/2021J. Bradford of Camden County
Camden County should be wholly contained in one district. The intent behind the proposed gerrymandering is obvious and insulting to an informed electorate. Districts should reflect a non-partisan voter-focused strategy instead of a tactical political effort to retain power by edict. We choose to live based on the overall appeal of the local community. Do not dilute our collective community voice in an attempt to solidify an artificial partisan advantage. Voters elect representatives; representatives do not elect voters. Embrace the changing demographics that reflect the Georgia of today and work with the electorate to enhance the quality of life for all Georgia residents!

10/26/2021D. Squaire of Cobb County
N.Fulton and Cobb are not similar to Forsyth County. Do not add combine. Leave the boundaries as they are.

10/26/2021B. Villnes of DeKalb County
Please do not allow Republicans to disregard census data and the results of the last election. Georgia is not a 65% majority Republican state. Please insure that the Georgia congressional map is fair and reflects the true population changes in our state.

10/25/2021A. B of Camden County
Please keep our cities and counties encased in a single district. Dividing cities and/or counties dilutes our vote.

10/25/2021C. Ebben of Thomas County
"New legislative appropriations and representation in Georgia and other states should reflect the needs and will of their constituents. My concern is over potential maneuvers by majority Georgia legislators to dilute democratic representation primarily in the metro Atlanta area (e.g. appropriating Buckhead into a GOP house district). House Districts 4,5,6,7 and 13 account for 524,202 new residents and according to the Brennan Center for Justice, “these numbers should pull three state house districts and about two-thirds of a congressional district from regions of the state that have shrunk or stagnated.” Another likely scheme would be stacking two incumbent representatives into a single district to neutralize democratic challengers. Given that key voting rights protections and Constitutional provisions of the Voting Rights Act of 1965) were removed by SCOTUS via Shelby County vs. Holder in 2013, there is no longer even a pretense that the GOP supports voting rights nor a representat"

10/25/2021J. Heath of Camden County
"All citizens of our state should have equal and unencumbered access to polling places and opportunities to cast a ballot - of course, that is what we expect in a free democracy - all citizens treated equally. In Woodbine, we were denied equal times for early voting, just because we are a smaller group of citizens, a more rural, less populated area - although we are the county seat of Camden and county workers could vote early in Woodbine! Camden County Georgia needs to be in one representative district so that the needs, growth, attention to priorities can be met for the whole population - otherwise, why have county lines, city borders? We need equal representation and opportunities to vote for a representative from ONE district - that of Camden County."

10/25/2021S. Berman of DeKalb County
"The district map proposed by Republicans is not fair. It is very obviously gerrymandering and creates a false 65/35 split, favoring Republicans."

10/25/2021A. O'Mard of DeKalb County
"I am reaching out to you and all the members of the Georgia joint redistricting committee to ensure that fair lines are drawn in Cherokee, Cobb, and Fulton counties. Specifically, I am requesting that the U.S. Congressional District 6 keeps its current composition of east Cobb, north Fulton, and north DeKalb counties. Adding Forsyth County as proposed does not maintain communities of interest, nor would it reflect the divers e needs of the current district. Overall, I want fair maps that respect communities of interest, are compact, and are contiguous. I support moving the future Georgia redistricting process to a nonpartisan commission. I want transparency and public involvement in the process."

10/25/2021T. Canning of Camden County
"For better, stronger, more focused representation, Camden County and the City of Kingsland should not be divided. All of Camden County should be in one not two Georgia State House Districts. As it is, Camden County voices are diluted and muffled by irrelevant needs and priorities of distant communities, cities, and counties; and, vice versa. Today, (1) District maps do not respect boundaries of Camden County and other counties to our west. House District 174 represents voters in the Kingsland, West Kingsland, and Browntown precincts in Camden County. House District 180 represents voters in the remaining eleven of fourteen Camden precincts (including North Kingsland and East Kingsland), but also voters in Charlton and Ware County. (2) Each of these counties has different economic engines and areas of interest. The dividing of Kingsland diminishes the impact of Kingsland voters in the Georgia House of Representatives — a practice known as “cracking”."

10/25/2021C. Jenkins of Cobb County
"I am requesting that the U.S. Congressional District 6 keeps its current composition of east Cobb, north Fulton, and north DeKalb counties. Adding Forsyth County as proposed does not maintain communities of interest, nor would it reflect the diverse needs of the current district. Overall, I want fair maps that respect communities of interest, are compact, and are contiguous. I support moving the future Georgia redistricting process to a nonpartisan commission. I want transparency and public involvement in the process"

10/25/2021N. Haskins of Cobb County
"I am reaching out to you and all the members of the Georgia joint redistricting committee to ensure that fair lines are drawn in Cherokee, Cobb, and Fulton counties. Specifically, I am requesting that the U.S. Congressional District 6 keeps its current composition of east Cobb, north Fulton, and north DeKalb counties. Adding Forsyth County as proposed does not maintain communities of interest, nor would it reflect the diverse needs of the current district. Overall, I want fair maps that respect communities of interest, are compact, and are contiguous. I support moving the future Georgia redistricting process to a nonpartisan commission. I want transparency and public involvement in the process."

10/25/2021W. Burlock of Cobb County
"I am requesting that the U.S. Congressional District 6 keeps its current composition of east Cobb, north Fulton, and north DeKalb counties. Adding Forsyth County as proposed does not maintain communities of interest, nor would it reflect the diverse needs of the current district. Overall, I want fair maps that respect communities of interest, are compact, and are contiguous. I support moving the future Georgia redistricting process to a nonpartisan commission. I want transparency and public involvement in the process."

10/25/2021A. Carswell of Cobb County
"I am requesting that the U.S. Congressional District 6 keeps its current composition of east Cobb, north Fulton, and north DeKalb counties. Adding Forsyth County as proposed does not maintain communities of interest, nor would it reflect the diverse needs of the current district. Overall, I want fair maps that respect communities of interest, are compact, and are contiguous. I support moving the future Georgia redistricting process to a nonpartisan commission. I want transparency and public involvement in the process."

10/25/2021J. Frisbee of Gwinnett County
"District maps should be drawn with fairness, population and proximity in mind. The map proposed by Republicans meets none of these requirements. The voters should choose the politicians, instead of politicians choosing their voters. The map proposed by Republicans is clear gerrymandering and creates a false 65/35 split, favoring Republicans. The voting trends of the state show that Georgians do not have a 65/35 split in their beliefs and voting patterns."

10/24/2021C. Mullin of Cobb County
"I am writing to express concern about the proposed redistricting which produces 9 - 5 Republican-Democrat majority districts. This gives Republicans a 65% majority. It is pretty clear, from the census data and the last election, that Georgia is not a 65-35 State. That is gerrymandering. The legislature can and must do better."

10/24/2021B. Robbins of DeKalb County
"District maps should be drawn with fairness, population and proximity in mind. The map proposed by Republicans meets none of these requirements. The voters should choose the politicians, instead of politicians choosing their voters."

10/24/2021D. Denton of Fulton County
I would add to my previous comments that I do not understand how anyone can think the outcome could be fair when it’s in the hands of partisan groups. A non-partisan task force should be making these decisions with input from the people.

10/24/2021D. Denton of Fulton County
"Please map districts and base any changes on population and proximity rather than drawing lines to favor a specific outcome. Results from the census and trending over recent past elections show that the Republican-drawn maps will very likely produce an outcome misaligned to the will of Georgia’s people. A perfect and blatant example of “packing and cracking” is found on the Republican-drawn maps in proposed changes to and around House District 6. Democrats, by contrast, have drawn maps showing a level and fair field (7/7 rather than 9/5). This is as it should be - fair. Let us, Georgia’s voters, determine election outcomes fairly! When political parties pick their voters rather than the other way around, we fail to have a government of, by, and for the people, and when we fail to ensure each vote counts, we fail to ensure the consent of the governed. We then fail our democracy. Thank you."

10/23/2021N. Brant of Bartow County
Please stop the gerrymandering. The Republican map does NOT represent the will of the people. Rather the will of those wanting to suppress the vote. There will be NO fair election until ALL people are represented fairly.

10/23/2021S. Mac of DeKalb County
"Please advocate for fair representation-one voter, one vote. We want to choose our reps, not have politicians carve their districts to suit unfair advantage!"

10/23/2021M. Stoops of DeKalb County
"I am writing to express concern about the proposed redistricting which produces 9 - 5 Republican-Democrat majority districts. This gives Republicans a 65% majority. It is pretty clear, from the census data and the last election, that Georgia is not a 65-35 State. That is gerrymandering. The legislature can and must do better."

10/23/2021E. Griffis of Baldwin County
"Districts should be made up by population and proximity, not gerrymandered for political favoritism. Ideally, districts would be determined without political consideration at all and with the use of computer technology to get the fairest balance for the population. Counties should not be split unless absolutely necessary."

10/23/2021J. Brandt of Greene County
"Please do NOT produce a map of gerrymandered districts. The legislature is already too partisan. Let's use a non-partisan commission to make districts that make sense based on the population and where they are clustered, without regard to their political tendencies and let the chips fall where they may."

10/22/2021P. McKibben of Macon-Bibb County
Georgia is 50/50 Repub/Dem now. Citizens are able to use software to draw their own fair maps That makes it easy to see when Repubs cheat voters by drawing gerrymandered maps. Ga Dems have drawn a split 7/7 Congressional map. That is the map Ga should use for new districts. https://www.georgiademocrat.org/georgia-democrats-release-proposed-congressional-map/ The Repub Congressional redistrict map as split 9/5 for Republicans. THAT's corrupt. We're watching which map you appoint.

10/22/2021M. Blackmon of DeKalb County
"My major concern is that all citizens need to see your maps prior to November 3 when the Georgia legislature reconvenes to vote on the new maps. All Georgians need at least a week to examine the new maps for Congress and the Georgia House and Senate. Second, small cities need to be in one district, not divided into multiple districts like 2/3 of our cities are currently. If you do not at least do these two things, you will show that you did not listen carefully at the public hearings."

10/22/2021P. Bowman of DeKalb County
"The current GOP proposed map for redistricting is obviously gerrymandered to produce 9 - 5 Republican-Democrat majority districts. This gives Republicans a 65% majority. It is pretty clear, from the census data and the last election, that Georgia is not a 65-35 State. That is gerrymandering. It’s time to have non-partisan, objective third party input in developing these maps. The Princeton University Gerrymandering Project has drawn 500,000 new Georgia maps at random that are more fair. Someone from either party should be able to win a district."

10/22/2021D. Rubin of DeKalb County
"The proposed redistricting proposed by the Republican caucus is cynical and self-serving. The solution to gerrymandering is a nonpartisan commission that will honor county boundaries, statistical urban clusters, and geographic cohesion. Let the chips fall where they may under such a nonpartisan redistricting. If a political party has something valuable to offer the people of Georgia, it has nothing to fear from a fair and scientific redistricting process."

10/22/2021R. Baggett of Athens-Clarke County
Your constituents should be able to see the proposed congressional maps in time for thorough and thoughtful comments. THIS constituent hopes to see a map that is drawn fairly and impartially -- I object to gerrymandering done by either political party and hope to see districts that are logically and reasonably drawn and that reflect changes in GA's population since the last redistricting.

10/22/2021J. P of Fulton County
Please keep Forsyth county OUT of the 6th district. They have nothing in common with North Fulton. Enact a non-partisan commission!

10/21/2021B. Dodd of DeKalb County
"PLEASE have a map that is NOT GERRYMANDERED, like the GOP one that gives them yet another district. This map does not reflect the true nature of the Georgia electorate. Have a map that is created via non-partisan panel. Please."

10/21/2021M. Gutierrez of DeKalb County
"Keep Forsyth OUT of 6! And restore a rational 7 & 10! The terrible dark history of Forsyth that continues to inhabit the psyche of its inhabitants and influence their interests to this day has NO business being politically commingled, through twisted map creation, with the goals and aspirations of the folks in 6! Despicable gerrymandering! SHAME, SHAME, SHAME!"

10/21/2021A. Spring of DeKalb County
"Re-districting should take into account what the majority of people want, not what republicans or democrats choose behind closed doors. Gerrymandering is by definition partisan. All elections should be democratic, and ultimately decided by voters, not by politicians, who are most concerned with staying in office rather than with public service."

10/21/2021A. Spring of DeKalb County
"Re-districting should take into account what the majority of people want, not what republicans or democrats choose behind closed doors. Gerrymandering is by definition partisan. All elections should be democratic, and ultimately decided by voters, not by politicians, who are most concerned with staying in office rather than with public service."

10/21/2021S. Lee of DeKalb County
A true democracy requires that all citizens be allowed to vote and have their votes valued equally. States must not be divided into districts that favor one party or position over another.

10/21/2021M. Gabbett of DeKalb County
"A gerrymandered district map is a basic source of the political divides in Georgia and elsewhere. We are supposed to live in a democracy where all the people regardless of political party, race, income are represented. Please provide us, all the people who live, work & play here, a district map to represent us vs. just political parties."

10/21/2021O. Borowski of Appling County
"As the GOP keeps declaring, we need to maintain the integrity of the elections. The proposed map suggests that the Georgia GOP is ready to steal the elections for the next 10 years. Please keep the elections fair by producing un-gerrymandered map that gives every Georgian's vote a fair chance to elect their representatives."

10/21/2021D. Stevens of Gwinnett County
"Please delay any revised congressional re-districting maps until fair and balanced consideration can be conducted, preferably with public approval. The gerrymandered proposal unjustly and unfairly splits our state along political rather than demographic lines."

10/21/2021J. Bragg of Coffee County
Please support a stimulus for the elderly. I can't pay for medicine much needed. I barely keep my electric on and eating has been a challenge. I am 66 and have worked since I was 16 but medical issues have eaten all savings. PLEASE HELP.

10/20/2021P. Sullivan of Chatham County
"An enormous number of small Georgia cities have been cracked across multiple house districts since the 2011 and subsequent mid-cycle redistricting. This strips cohesive representation from residents of these cities. As new maps are drawn, a sincere effort should be made to reunite these cities into the same districts."

10/20/2021P. Sullivan of Chatham County
"While we appreciate seeing the Congressional maps early, the ones that will require far more study before they're adopted are the Georgia House and Senate maps. We'd like to see them pronto. Also, I feel you should use the fairness benchmarks developed by the Princeton Gerrymandering Project and Fair Districts GA to evaluate all proposed maps for fairness, partisan lean, and minority representation. Maps need to be competitive and give voters a choice of representation."

10/20/2021T. Canning of Camden County
"Is there any plan, action, or progress regarding adjusting the boundaries of Georgia House of Representatives Districts 174 & 180 (map attached) that would result in District 180 to include all of Camden County? The following is relevant to my inquiry: Brennan Center For Justice ""...Several redistricting criteria — like following county or municipal lines, or drawing districts that are compact — are in some ways proxies for finding communities of common interest. These are groups of individuals who are likely to have similar legislative concerns, and who might therefore benefit from cohesive representation in the legislature. ..."""

10/18/2021A. Lewis of DeKalb County
"The Georgia General Assembly must take up the issue of having a non-partisan commission to conduct redistricting in future years. We must find ways to decrease the hyper politicalization of our times. ""I am not interested in power for power's sake, but I'm interested in power that is moral, that is right and that is good."" - Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr."

10/17/2021T. Lewiski of Brooks County
Iverson's tech extra credit

10/16/2021C. Simmons of Oglethorpe County
Please look at what's going on in the Piedmont Medical Community! Surely some of you watch the news

10/16/2021L. Bonam of Columbia County
Fair districting is the only way to ensure every voice is heard and fair elections can take place. We should not be at the mercy of republican gerrymandering because they feel if they do not participate in this antiquated practice the will “lose”. Elections should not work that way.

10/15/2021J. P of Fulton County
Cobb County is exactly the size of one congressional district. Why not make Cobb its own district?

10/14/2021J. King of Fulton County
"Current and proposed maps split an apartment complex into two different districts causing issues with voter registration. The affected lot is 1050 Lenox Park Blvd NE Atlanta, GA. This property is bisected into both Fulton and DeKalb county, Atlanta and Brookhaven. The county line splits apartments and mailboxes. It separates kitchens from bedrooms."

10/14/2021J. P of Fulton County
A 9-5 R majority map is NOT proportional or fair.

10/14/2021K. Dalesandre of Columbia County
"According to the 2020 census, District 006 was over the ideal size, but the redistricting plan clearly makes it larger. I do not understand why a county that was already oversized in population from the standard deviation would be made larger. District 009 is also over the ideal and yet it is larger. District 11 is over by quite a bit, yet it stays about the same size. District 001 is under the standard deviation, but it stays about the same size. District 12 is also under the ideal size, but it stays about the same. If the above observations are incorrect, then maybe the Committees need to make more detailed maps. As it stands, this redistricting looks more like gerrymandering than an honest evening out according to the 2020 census."

10/14/2021R. Jadus of Muscogee County
We need a complete forensic audit of the November 2020 election and the runoff election to verify the integrity of the election process.

10/13/2021R. Bartels of Cobb County
One Senator Per County. Problem solved. Reynolds v. Sims is a joke and will be overturned. Most state legislatures organized by county when constitution was ratified.

10/13/2021K. Peterson of Gwinnett County
"I don't like the IRA checking my saving and checking accounts for 600.00 deposits or withdrawals. The government shouldn't have this power to watch me each month. I am very worried about this. Also, don't like 3.5 spending bill. I don't want higher taxes."

10/13/2021P. Walker of Clayton County
"Citizens not politicians can be accountable for redistricting. As citizens and taxpayers of Georgia, let us rise to the call. It takes ALL of our voices to create equity. The agenda is clear, a better quality of life for ALL!"

10/12/2021J. P of Fulton County
"Georgia is too blue to only have 5 Dem seats. 6-8 Dem seats is reasonable and proportional. Stop with the power grab, Repubs. It's going to cost your party in the future."

10/12/2021P. Smith of Gwinnett County
"I dislike the current redistricting proposal. I live in Gwinnett. The proposal puts a large portion of Gwinnett into the same district as Hall County. This is wrong. People where I live in Gwinnett have little in common with people in Hall county. Very disappointed in this. This is an evil plan. I'll campaign vigorously against the interests who proposed this plan. Representatives who are likely to be elected will live in Hall County... they won't know where Duluth is. Sincerely, Phil Smith"

10/11/2021J. P of Fulton County
"For the love of God, PLEASE enact a non-partisan commission for redistricting in Georgia. That way, both Republicans and Democrats have an equal say in this process."

10/11/2021J. P of Fulton County
Putting Forsyth County in the 6th district is a disgusting power grab. They have nothing in common with North Fulton. Totally different needs. Keep Lucy McBath in power and stop screwing Georgia over.

10/10/2021D. Smith of Hall County
hello! redistricting will NEVER have more important and longer lasting consequences than our current voting system with Dominion machines! it's a tragedy! that we can 'hear grass grow louder' than our elected officials about the current resistance in court for a statewide forensic audit in Georgia! on Nov 3 2021 you ALL need to step up or step down...just saying!

10/10/2021R. Davis of Gordon County
"The AMERICAN people are disappointed with Biden. We've had enough! The Constitution states a president can be removed from office for wrong doing based on the PUBLIC'S view. Biden is NOT COMPETENT to lead this country. Biden has committed TREASON by leaving millions of dollars worth of Hi-Tech military Equipment in a Terrorist country and leaving AMERICANS behind, he's allowed illegals into this country, has declared WAR on AMERICA by issuing illegal mandates that goes against our Constitutional Rights, He has given Power to the IRS to snoop into our bank accounts, again, going against the Constuition, he is trying to CENSOR private social media which is a violation of FREEDOM OF SPEECH in the Constitution and next he is trying to take our guns and our Christianity. We want him out. If he isn't removed, WAR is coming to the states. So, to avoid that action, I nominate him AND KAMALA to he IMPEACHED. Ya'll need to step it up cause I'm sending this all over!"

10/8/2021P. Kush of Fulton County
"I am a resident of the 6th District in Fulton County, and the addition of Forsyth County to our district is inappropriate. Fulton and Forsyth are not communities of interest. The pandemic has shown that we do not share the same interests, as can be seen from the very different responses to COVID in those communities. As a Fulton resident who works in Atlanta, I am more connected to the city of Atlanta than Forsyth County is to Atlanta, as are many other residents of the current 6th District. Forsyth also contains Lake Lanier, which means they may have some interests related to that body of water that those of us in the 6th District don't share. There are also more rural areas in Forsyth and smaller towns that mean they do not share a community of interest with the densely populated communities of the current 6th district."

10/8/2021J. Cordano of Lumpkin County
Why have we not seen anything about your voting record? I feel like you are just laying low to get your paycheck and taking advantage of your position...

10/7/2021C. Garcia of Rockdale County
"As you may have seen the demographics in Georgia have changed drastically. The Latino vote and community have grown. I support a redistricting map that accurately reflects the racial and party-affiliation demographics of Georgians and that allows for competitive districts. I also support a transparent process of redistricting. The nonpartisan redistricting process would reflect those changes and ensure that all Georgians are fairly represented in the state and federal government. Stop the gerrymandering, and let all Georgians see and contribute to this process."

10/7/2021L. Denzin of Cobb County
"I have two comments/questions: 1) I have reviewed the draft of the congressional map an I want to know the justification behind the changes to districts 006 and 007. 2) I am very much in favor of having public forums to discuss changing the current district reapportionment in the state of GA. Assigning incumbent politicians to apply changes after each census interjects bias, regardless of which party is in majority at that time. A non-partisan, independent commission selected through a screening process conducted by an independent entitty of members who are not involved as public officials nor current lawmakers seems to be a feasible, more democratic option."

10/7/2021K. Todd of DeKalb County
"Thank you for putting out a draft version of the congressional map. Doing so weeks before the special session will allow the public to provide useful input before the map is finalized. It is important that the committee apply the same transparent approach to the state legislative maps so the public has time to review and comment on those maps, as well. A public response to comments regarding the maps would be greatly appreciated. People need to know that their comments were considered and integrated into the map-drawing process. Thank you, Kimberly Todd"

10/7/2021E. Silva of Gwinnett County
"As a resident of Gwinnett County, I would like the Redistricting Committee to keep my community together. We need to work to establish a nonpartisan redistricting process that helps reflect the recent Census results. It is time that the state of Georgia provides fair and equal representation. The needs of all residents should be represented in their district."

10/7/2021N. Camacho of Gwinnett County
"I am a Georgia Resident, and we need to make sure that the representatives of each district can fairly and accurately represent the needs of all Georgians living in their districts. Please establish a non-partisan commission to redraw districts, stop the gerrymandering, and let the community see and contribute to this process."

10/7/2021N. Dutra of Cobb County
I truly believe the redistricting process is in critical need of an update. We should move towards establishing a non-partisan committee to work on redrawing district lines and allow the public to have a bigger input in the process. Everyone in the state of Georgia deserves the right to fair representation!

10/7/2021D. Garcia of DeKalb County
"I'm a Dekalb County resident. I live in the 5th Congressional District. The results of the most recent census show that the demographics in Georgia are changing. A just and nonpartisan redistricting process would reflect those changes and ensure that all Georgians are fairly represented in state and federal government. Stop the gerrymandering, and let all Georgians see and contribute to this process."

10/7/2021G. Deans of DeKalb County
"The gerrymandering of the 6th and 7th and 9th districts are blatant power grabs that do not reflect the will of those constituents. It is blatant dilution of the populace's will and it's clear that those who are doing it have no interest in fair and representative elections. The counties don't need to be diluted further as the demographics change. The districts need to reflect the will of the people, not the will of a select few."

10/7/2021S. Terrell of Fulton County
"Rural Forsyth County and urban north Fulton might as well be on opposite sides of the moon. Our needs with regards to infrastructure, funding, schools, and taxes are wildly different and are not well served by the same representative. Lumping them into the same voting district is an aggressive, overt move to dilute the progressive politics of the more populated Sandy Springs, Alpharetta and Roswell communities. North Fulton deserves representation that reflects its priorities."

10/6/2021F. Lindon of Fulton County
"Milton, Alpharetta, Roswell, Johns Creek and Sandy Springs have long been Fulton County districts with similar interest, demographics and economic interests. It is a blatant nod to gerrymandering to now split them up and lump a sizable portion in Fulton with Forsyth County. Make voting districts competitive. Representation needs to fairly reflect the communities served. The lines you’ve proposed fail to do this. Partisan politicians here are choosing the voters. We need to have a fair chance at choosing who will represent us."

10/6/2021R. Bartlone of Fulton County
The proposed changes to the 6th are nothing more than partisan gerrymandering. Milton/ Roswell/ Alpharetta have far more to do with each other than pulling them apart and siphoning most of the district with our northern neighbors. This is absurd and so transparently a bid to sway the district back to its historical voting patterns.

10/6/2021K. Brebner of Gwinnett County
"North Gwinnett County should not be moved out of the 7th district and into the 9th. There seems to be no logical reason for this move other than partisan gerrymandering. There are many important issues that affect this part of Gwinnett County that are irrelevant to citizens living in the rural areas of the north Georgia mountains. It seems unlikely that a representative of the 9th district would be familiar with the issues facing citizens in north Gwinnett, nor would much of their time be spent working towards these issues when the majority of constituents in the rural 9th district have other concerns. We need to make sure that the representatives of each district can fairly and accurately represent the needs of ALL citizens living in their districts. North Gwinnett shares bipartisan concerns with other metro Atlanta areas on issues like transportation, housing, and the economy, and this region includes a more racially and culturally diverse."

10/5/2021J. Kohler of DeKalb County
"Gerrymandering is theft, deception and fraud. It is the most undemocratic and heinous act of political corruption imaginable, along with denying citizens their right to vote which is also employed by our venal and power mad government. Freedom and Democracy are empty words if our political process is undermined in service to a select few. We need a federal elections agency now to ensure free and fair elections. Voting districts should not be in the hands of those with a dog in the fight."

10/5/2021N. Gooch of DeKalb County
I support a redistricting map that accurately reflects the racial and party-affiliation demographics of Georgians and that allows for competitive districts. I also support a transparent process of redistricting.

10/5/2021T. Laird of DeKalb County
The central role of democratically elected leaders is to represent the will of the people. That can only be achieved through fair redistricting that creates maps ensuring constituents from different areas elect representatives who will bring their voices to conversations and political compromise. Leaders across all parties must give voice to the goal of fairness in representation. This issue transcends partisanship and presents an opportunity for some leaders to recover their reputations and dignity after a period of proceeding as though our public life is some kind of football game and your team winning is the only goal.

10/5/2021C. Vogt of DeKalb County
I want to see in this new apportionment of districts a reflection of the changing demographics of Georgia. Fair representation would be the goal.

10/5/2021J. Minarich of DeKalb County
"The results of the most recent census show that the demographics in Georgia are changing. A just and nonpartisan redistricting process would reflect those changes and ensure that all Georgians are fairly represented in state and federal government. Stop the gerrymandering, and let all Georgians see and contribute to this process."

10/5/2021L. Latham of Fulton County
"Lumping Forsyth County and N. Fulton County together to make up the 6th District makes no sense as N. Fulton and Forsyth have entirely different needs and problems and one or the other will suffer from lack of representation. As a lifetime N. Fulton resident, I have been to Forsyth County maybe 5 times in 70 years. It has nothing to do with my life. Why would I want my Congressional representative concerning themselves with Forsyth issues?"

10/5/2021T. Dickstein of Fulton County
I was hoping for a fair map but it looks like you're trying to carve up the 6th district. Those of us living in this part of Fulton should not be lumped in with Forsyth. Stop the gerrymandering

10/5/2021D. Rowley of Fulton County
I want the Georgia redistricting process to result in fair maps that reflect the census so that Georgians are fairly represented in state and federal government. We need to avoid racial gerrymandering.

10/5/2021P. Olson of DeKalb County
I am hoping for the fair drawing of district maps that reflect the population changes in Georgia. Census data confirms that all of the population growth has been in minority and urban populations.

10/5/2021K. Archer of Cobb County
"I live in a tiny sliver of CD 10 cut out to break up my area from having a larger voting impact. This places me in the same district as people that live 25+ miles north of me, but not the people that live across the street from me. How does that make sense? We don’t have the same concerns or issues. This nonsense needs to stop. If you can’t win an election without cheating, maybe you shouldn’t be running for office. Change your platform, not the voting districts!!!!"

10/5/2021J. Barstow of DeKalb County
"I am hoping against hope that the maps drawn will represent the actual populations of the districts. Since the population of African Americans and other people of color has grown more in proportion to the growth of white Georgians, the maps should reflect that."

10/4/2021E. Wright of Meriwether County
"Please consider the impact that this has on communities when people have to find rides, get care for children or adults, coverage for work, etc. Chopping up communities just for the sake of doing it is irrational and, many times, fundamentally and functionally cruel. If you are so insecure that your party cannot win a seat on a level playing field, then that alone should tell you that this entire process is a form of dishonesty and deception on the part of government officials on the voting public. Are you really so callus to the moral and ethical standards of society and every religion in existence that you cannot bring yourselves to be FAIR? Most of you boast of your Christainity but it is hard to see a thing remotely Christ-like about the way you behave. Rather, we see the behavior of the Pharisees who caused the crucifixion to take place. The Carpenter himself called them ""blind guides"" and ""graves filled with rotting corpses"". Is that you? You cannot even compete fairly. SMH."

10/4/2021T. Jenkins of Coweta County
"Dear Sir, Taxes are going sky high in Coweta Co. In the process more & more houses , apartments, and new businesses going up. There is no reason for my taxes to be going up first $500.00 in two years. Too many employees on payroll. Why don't we in Georgia have no tax after age 65 like Alabama. Try living on social security and paying over $2000.00 a year for taxes You want to make a big hit in Georgia, lower our taxes. Thank-you so much Thomas Jenkins 1363 Stallings Rd. Senoia,Ga. 30276"

10/4/2021K. Kroll of Cobb County
"I'm in CD-13, which has always been ridiculously gerrymandered. Why is my part of Cobb still included with parts of Fayette, Henry and Clayton counties? In the proposed map Cobb has been butchered to make CD-6 more likely to swing Republican. This is an obvious power grab. Put back the parts of Dekalb you removed from CD-6. Redistricting should be led by a non-partisan, independent group."

10/4/2021P. Anderson of DeKalb County
"It’s too much to ask for politicians, or anyone else, to work against their own self-interest. For this reason, I urge the Legislature to consult with non-partisan or fully bi-partisan groups to create new legislative maps. Please use the Princeton Gerrymandering Project’s benchmarks to ensure fairness in maps. The redistricting process has historically favored incumbents, and both parties are complicit. It is past time to take it out of the hands of people fighting for their survival, and make sure that voters choose their elected representatives, not the other way around. Ensure that the proposed maps are made public, and citizens have a meaningful opportunity to comment and have their concerns taken into account before maps are voted on. No more back-room, last minute deals - the work of redistricting should be done in full view of the public, with video or in-person observers present during discussions and decisions."

10/4/2021D. Smith of DeKalb County
"A fifth generation Georgian, I grew up in rural west Georgia, attending UGA in Athens, and now reside in Chamblee. I've found Georgians are diverse in many metrics, all the more now than when I was young. All Georgians deserve representation through fair districting in the elections of our government officials. I encourage your integrity to your oath as you work toward fair maps that reflect the population in Georgia. Thank you."

10/4/2021C. Jackson of Fulton County
"As a resident of North Fulton, I find I have VERY different interests and needs than that of someone in far north Forsyth County. This redistricting attempt to disband GA 06 is very overtly an attempt to subvert and silence the voices of those in North Fulton."

10/4/2021A. Shepperson of Fulton County
"The planned redistricting is splitting communities and gutting the 6th district into various districts which are not cohesive. We have nothing to do with (far flung) Forsyth, or other exurbs farther north in Georgia. We are not a community with shared interests in those areas."

10/4/2021L. Kuechenmeister of Fulton County
"The proposal of Ga06 district makes no sense. Dunwoody has been removed, in favor of adding Forsyth County. There is no shared community vision of this district, which mixes metro Atlanta with Forsyth county."

10/4/2021M. Bagwell of DeKalb County
A few years I was in district 4 then you redistricted and put me in district 6. Now I hear that you may gerrymander my district again. Please be fair in redistricting this time and let the voters be fairly represented. This district has a good representative now and reflects the will of the majority of the voters. It should not be changed.

10/4/2021K. Orenstein of Fulton County
"As a resident of the 6th District, I cannot understand why Forsyth County is being added. This redrawing of the 6th District does not represent my community."

10/4/2021J. Franklin of Fulton County
"Please revisit the proposal of Ga06 district. I live in Sandy Springs. We are a suburb of Atlanta, next to Dunwoody. The proposed revision takes away shared community vision with our surrounding areas. It makes no sense to lump us in with Forsyth county to me and my neighbors."

10/4/2021L. Schlafly of DeKalb County
I am strongly opposed to the shift of Dunwoody out of GA06. Dunwoody is far more a community of interest with the current 06 than the proposed 04. Dunwoody will lose the representation we voted for. That should not happen.

10/4/2021S. Calahan of Fulton County
The proposed 6th CD is absolutely not representative of preservation of communities of interest. Sandy Spring and Roswell have nothing to do with the far flung exurbs of Atlanta in distant Forsyth County. The proposed map should reform most of the current 6th district and not fracture it among several other districts which all spread from various parts of the current 6th to far flung parts of the state with which those communities share little interest.

10/4/2021N. Mize of Cobb County
"Please include the Smyrna area within a single Congressional District, preferably the 11th. While it would be ideal to have the entirety of Cobb County in a single district, I realize this is not likely."

10/4/2021K. Yaccarino of Cobb County
"Good morning, I am contacting this my officials due to the concerns of COVID19 and a couple more things. Myself and many other fellow citizen's are sick and tired of the COVID19 restrictions. The facts are out there and we know that COVID19 is just as serious as the year round flu. Mask mandates are UNAMERICAN. It is my body my choice. Again, we know the real facts about COVID19 and everything the left wing is saying is making it seem like it is the end of the world. We are tired of the taxes coming in to compensate for all the money the government gave citizens the last and a half. Now Joe Biden administration is trying to tax us even more? This is not the America I know and grew up with. Gas prices are starving us. Taxes are starving us. Literally. We are sick of the slow take over of our rights and we need someone to fight for us before we have to go to fullest extent of fight."

9/30/2021D. Beach of DeKalb County
"The changes to the maps that have been shown to the public show clear intent to favor one party over the other. The maps should be drawn such that they represent the population, not to cherry-pick the population so as to achieve a desired outcome."

9/30/2021W. Schlegel of Paulding County
I 100% agree with the comment from another Paulding resident: Paulding County does not belong in the 14th district. Paulding is part of the 10 metro Atlanta counties. Most of the 14th is mountain people and part of metro Chattanooga. We have so much in common with Bartow County and would like to be a part of the 11th district. We share roads and and water with Bartow. Our airports work together. Please consider putting Paulding in the 11th.

9/29/2021S. Samuel of Hall County
"What is the justification for making Forsyth County apart of the 6th district, as oppose to the 9th district? Why does the 9th district split Gwinnett County, and additionally why does the 10th district cross into Gwinnett County at all? The map should bring northern Gwinnett county into the 6th district and put Forsyth county into the 9th. These lines were supposed to be drawn according to population shifts and fair representation. But it is clear by placing half of Gwinnett county in the 9th district that you are attempting to disenfranchise the diversity of voters in Gwinnett county. This is purely an example of politicians picking their voters, instead of voters choosing their representatives."

9/29/2021A. Donahue of Cobb County
"The proposed 11th district map looks like a salamander (i.e., a gerrymander). Compact Bartow County, which tends to share community interests with Cherokee County, is divided in half along a jagged line. Meanwhile, racially diverse suburban / urban areas of east Cobb County are split out of the 6th, despite these voters' shared community interests with their neighbors in the 6th district and the need for the 11th district to shed population. The proposed lines of the 11th district are at odds with principles of fairness, compactness and shared community interest."

9/28/2021S. Kramer of Fulton County
"I am in 1 of the few pricincts in North Fulton (Johns Creek) drawn for the 7th CD. I have no community of interest with Gwinnett County. There is a major river dividing us. I have affinity with Forsyth County and North Fulton. We're a very similar community. Not so with Gwinnett. Please redraw all Johns Creek precincts back into CD-6, where they belong. Why is Johns Creek being punished? I'm sure there are much better places from which to take precincts for CD-7 than Johns Creek, which otherwise would be the heart of CD-6. Why is that CD-7 finger protruding across the Chattahoochee? It makes no sense and needs to be revised. I STRONGLY DISAGREE with this finger. If you move us back to CD-6, I'd feel much better that the community of interest is maintained."

9/28/2021P. Bray of Chatham County
"I am extremely concerned about the Republican usurpation of fair and equal voting rights and Republican election subversion everywhere in the U. S., but particularly in the state of Georgia, where the whole nefarious plan started. For God's sake, if you have any shreds of your delinquent conscience left, do the right thing for the people, all the people, not just yourselves"

9/28/2021N. Hollingshed of Paulding County
Paulding County does not belong in the 14th district. Paulding is part of the 10 metro Atlanta counties. Most of the 14th is mountain people and part of metro Chattanooga. We have so much in common with Bartow County and would like to be a part of the 11th district. We share roads and and water with Bartow. Our airports work together.Please consider putting Paulding in the 11th.

9/28/2021M. Fitzgerald of Fulton County
"On the Congressional draft map, having a small thumbprint of the 7th district--crossing county and natural (river) boundaries into N. Fulton makes absolutely ZERO sense. There is NO community of interest of the Fulton voters have with Gwinnett! ZERO! To meet the numbers game, you are using a small section of Fulton voters as useless cannon fodder thus relegating them to voiceless purgatory for 10 years! PLEASE, reconsider bleeding the 7th District into Johns Creek/Fulton!"

9/28/2021R. McMeen of Richmond County
"I do not believe there can ever be a truly fair districting process where politicians choose their own voters. This must be done by a third party which is as non-partisan as possible. Please vote for a professional, non-partisan, and most importantly not made up of politicians commission to write our districts based on population, not racial or political affiliation demographics."

9/27/2021D. Peterson of DeKalb County
"It is essential that the redistricting process in Georgia move forward in a transparent and collaborative way, with the opportunity for public input and understanding of the reasoning behind the mapping process. The community must have the option for feedback on proposed maps. In the spirit of ""By the People"", voters should and must have the opportunity to select their representation. Thank you."

9/24/2021J. Rocheleau of Fulton County
Please establish a non-partisan commission to redraw districts. The practice of gerrymandering diminishes our votes and allows politicians to pick who votes for them instead of the voter choosing their representatives.

9/24/2021D. Cardone of DeKalb County
"Please contract with an outside, non-partisan entity to draw the redistricting maps. Georgia is already highly gerimanded and creating even more unfair and politically motivated districts is an attack on our democratic values. In the next decade, Democrats will make up a majority of GA voters. If you want free and fair elections, you need to protect the integrity of the process, including depoliticizing the district maps."

9/23/2021J. Edelson of Fulton County
"1) Please ensure that the proposed maps are made public and citizens have a meaningful opportunity to comment and have their comments responded to BEFORE maps are voted upon. 2) Please use the Princeton Gerrymandering Projects' benchmarks to evaluate the maps before they are finalized. 3) Please minimize long, skinny state house districts like mine (HD 55) which are narrow but miles and miles long covering many disparate communities. These districts are difficult for legislators to effectively represent, and voters do not get the representation we deserve."

9/23/2021M. Zuluaga of Fulton County
"Please show the public the proposed maps that the committee will be voting on. This is so important so that the public will be able to reflect and put public hearing. Also please make this process language accessible. These maps will impact everyone no matter the language they speak, who they love, where they come from or what race we are. Everyone should be able to have some imput!"

9/22/2021C. Bohm of Fulton County
Redistricting needs to reflect the current population of GA. Lines should be drawn without manipulation.

9/22/2021S. Ennis of DeKalb County
"I fully support comments made by Dem Elena Parent - the “snake redistricting” is abhorrent GOP gerrymandering. How about GOP stop trying to overturn our democracy and try to win with policies (hint hint - trying to repeal the ACA & stripping tens of millions of healthcare, fighting mask mandates during a pandemic and continual ad-hominem attacks on Dems & our Pres Biden who inherited an Exxon-Valdez level mess from TFG is neither smart nor patriotic)."

9/22/2021M. Rezak of DeKalb County
"This community is Albany State University, which is a community of interest that should be kept together by the redistricting process. https://districtr.org/COI/52065"

9/22/2021M. Rezak of DeKalb County
"This community is Agnes Scott College, which is a community of interest that should be kept together during the redistricting process. https://districtr.org/COI/52057"

9/22/2021M. Rezak of DeKalb County
"This community is Abraham Baldwin Agricultural College, which is a community of interest that should be kept together by the redistricting process. https://districtr.org/COI/52045"

9/22/2021M. Rezak of DeKalb County
"My community, Emory University, is located in Northeast Atlanta, in DeKalb County. This map, https://districtr.org/COI/52017, shows the boundaries of Emory. Other Important locations include Clairmont Campus , preserve, Emory Point, Emory Village, and Emory Hospital. Right now, Emory is kept together by political district boundaries, and it is crucial that it remains this way. One of the biggest issues to this community is the environment. Emory strives for sustainability, which can be seen by the presence of recycling and compost bins all around campus. So far, 37 buildings have been renovated or built to be LEED-certified, and the Emory Shuttle system runs on biofuel, recycled from cooking oils. Emory has set a goal of carbon neutrality by 2050, and has made significant progress, having already reduced emissions by 31% since the goal was set in 2010. This community is committed to protecting the environment, and needs representation in government that will support this cause."

9/22/2021P. Smith of Cobb County
"It SHOULD go without saying that districts should NEVER be drawn in a way that elicits a desired election outcome by either party. But apparently, it needs to be said: Districts should NEVER be drawn in a way that elicits a desired election outcome by either party. Please do not play games with the votes of Georgians. Determination of districts should allow fair, equitable representation of Georgians, unencumbered by the political slant of the ruling party. Let's live out American values of democracy."

9/21/2021J. Teague of Henry County
"I humbly ask our legislators to make sure there is an equitable redistricting of the district lines. If this means giving this responsibility to an outside agency so that party politics, Democrat or Republican, do not pollute the redistricting process then so be it. This is an essential process of our state and federal constitution to make sure there is equal representation for all citizens."

9/21/2021E. Beal of Clayton County
"To truly be a democracy, our counties should not be sliced and diced to achieve the election of a certain party. Our districts should reflect the demographics of our state. Please don’t carve up Clayton or any county."

9/21/2021K. Geeslin of Crisp County
"None of this matters IF we don’t audit the 11/3/2020 election and the 1/6/2021 runoff election in GA. This matter should be at the top of the list! Without election integrity in this state, our voices don’t count, no matter how things are ‘reapportioned’. As employees of the people of this state, it is time for you all to STAND UP and give the people of GA this FULL FORENSIC AUDIT that is being asked for from your employer (WE tHE PEOPLE of GA). What are you hiding?"

9/21/2021J. Towson of Macon-Bibb County
"Get rid of the Dominion machines...period. Make Voter Integrity Laws, secure Georgia elections for Georgia citizens. If you do not get it right before the 2022 elections, rest assured the people of Georgia will not forget it. You will never be able to show your face in public again, you will be pariahs and though you may never serve any jail time, you will be shunned from the lives of Georgia citizens for failing us. GID help you if you fail."

9/21/2021W. Shi of Forsyth County
"Following the sentiment of many other citizens here, I urge legislators to take this opportunity to remove the partisan gamesmanship from this process. Giving we the people a chance to review the proposals you make would help restore some confidence in our legislators. I also support detaching Forsyth county from Gwinnett. Both counties are sufficiently large and diverse in their own rights. This was the result of a partisan effort and should be corrected during this special session."

9/21/2021J. Fry of Houston County
"I see lots of ""demands"" for the process to be ""fair and diverse"" in the comments but the fact is that the republicans must correct decades of democrat schemes to cheat the majority out of the deal. Remember, the democrats also demand YOU have a passport to prove you got a shot to get into the movies but THEY don't need any ID to go to the voting booth. Do not give them an inch!"

9/20/2021C. Jones of Macon-Bibb County
"Please adopt non-partisan, objective redistricting standards, to ensure fair, non-partisan Georgia maps based on current census data. In addition, Georgia is long overdue and should utilize a fully transparent process which include public engagement. There should be no secrecy provisions in the legislative redistricting process as this process directly impacts we the people. The public should be allowed to actively participate in the redistricting process. Public hearings should be held after initial maps are drafted so that the public has the opportunity to see and voice concerns, objections and/or words of support of said redistricting efforts prior to their official adoption. This process should allow enough time for public feedback and input. If the legislators are as concerned as they claim to be about fair elections, devoid of fraud, then redistricting should also be fair and devoid of fraud for all voters, and in all districts by including we the people. Thank you."

9/18/2021G. Higbee of Cobb County
"As a concerned Republican, I ask of you that you please eliminate partisan redistricting and establish a nonpartisan or bipartisan commission instead. I know that it is a lot to ask, but it will make Georgia a freer and fairer state."

9/15/2021S. Ortiz of Forsyth County
"With the incredible growth that Forsyth has experienced, the diversity of that growth must be acknowledged. Power must be fairly distributed so that democracy can prevail."

9/13/2021L. Mann of Forsyth County
"Forsyth Counties inclusion in the 7th District does not fit the Consultative views and future of citizens. Please consider placing Forsyth, Dawson & Hall counties in a common District. Gwinnett has ample population and different culture for a District. Citizens in Forsyth want to maintain our unique lifestyle. Thank you for your hard work. L Mann Forsyth Co,"

9/13/2021D. DeLaughter of Athens-Clarke County
"Please eliminate partisan gerrymandering and promote transparency and genuine democratic representation by appointing an independent, bi-partisan commission to establish districts in the state of GA. Thank you."

9/13/2021N. Gentry of Tift County
I want a non partisan commission in charge of redistricting. As a Republican I see what is coming based on the results of the last election. While Republicans have the power I demand you consider the long game and enact a non partisan commission like several states have already done so we don't lose input of conservative values when the liberals take over our state.

9/13/2021G. Gentry of Tift County
I don't like Tift County being diluted into 3 districts. This has led to our County being represented by 3 different Representatives from outside Tift Co and 2 of those 3 don't feel led to even respond to an email from a Tift Co resident. I would like to also see a non partisan commission in charge of redistricting on a permanent basis.

9/13/2021D. Hirsch of DeKalb County
"I am writing to respectfully request that the committee utilize nonpartisan data and maps to determine redistricting lines. It is damaging to local governments and our people when we are forced into gerrymandered districts that deepen community divisions rather than unify us as Georgians. Let's show the rest of the country that we can operate in a way that respects the real meaning of ""we the people"" and stop partisan gerrymandering from either side of the aisle. Thank you."

9/13/2021E. Shackelford of DeKalb County
"We need an independent commission to draw district lines. Already, it sounds as if Republicans plan to break up predominantly Democrat districts in Athens. It defies democracy to perpetuate unfair power grabs. Please use the work of the Princeton Gerrymandering Project, and please stop the gerrymandering."

9/11/2021S. Fraysse of DeKalb County
"Please review the benchmarks of the Princeton Gerrymandering Project to ensure fair maps will be drawn in our current redistricting process. In a Democracy, the voters should be allowed to choose the candidates and not allow incumbents to cherry-pick the voters they like. Be fair to Georgia voters!"

9/11/2021S. Southall of Cobb County
I ask that your committee use the Princeton Gerrymandering Project’s benchmarks to ensure that the proposed maps are fair to ALL Georgia citizens.

9/11/2021M. Friedman of Cherokee County
Please make our elections FAIR for everyone by using the Princeton Gerrymandering Project’s maps. Our democracy is at stake!

9/11/2021R. Goldman of Cobb County
PLEASE consider using the Non-Partisan Priceton Gerrymandering project to ensure these maps are non biased. It is what our democracy is all about. Do the FAIR thing for ALL Georgians.

9/11/2021D. Delle Monache of Gwinnett County
"Most of us grew up believing we could participate in public policy by voting. We were taught that the voice of the majority is what our elected leaders would consider as they worked out policies and laws, subject only to minority protections guaranteed by the Constitution. I hope the new political district lines are drawn without political bias. And I hope the committee will carefully ensure that lines are not drawn to protect, strengthen, or weaken a specific party’s position in a particular district, or to accommodate insiders in government, or any of their well funded, unelected influencers."

9/10/2021E. Lichtenfeld of Cobb County
Our Country is broken. You can help heal our State by following the benchmarks of the nonpartisan Princeton Gerrymandering Project to ensure maps are FAIR. If you continue with gerrymandering to purposely stack the deck in one party's favor you will be adding to the divisions that are tearing us apart.

9/10/2021R. Herman of DeKalb County
"Please use an independent, non-partisan commission to oversee redistricting. Our great country is based on the voters choosing their representatives and not the representatives choosing the voters. Any candidate should earn their position by winning the hearts and minds of the constituents, not by drawing district lines to choose their constituents."

9/10/2021E. Gonzalez of DeKalb County
Please use an independent non partisan commission to design redistricting fairly. Let the people be heard in all matters.

9/10/2021S. LeClerc of Fulton County
"I support Senator Elena Parent's proposal. Please use an independent, non-partisan commission to oversee redistricting in order to reduce and eliminate gerrymandered districting practices. All people deserve appropriate representation."

9/9/2021P. Gainesville of Hall County
"Put an end to “mandatory” vaccines for employees!!! This is hurting our workforce, this is hurting people who have stuck around the same company for years and years. This is no longer about public health when both vaccinated and unvaccinated can transmit and receive the virus. It’s gotten ridiculous!!! Colleges and universities should also not mandate the vaccines, our children and our young adults should not be subjected to these types of experiments, because as a reminder, the Pfizer vaccine is STILL under the FDA’s EUA. My stance is far more popular than even local newspapers will admit to. Understand that you have a moral obligation to fight for our individual freedoms and our right to decide what we will and will not put in our bodies."

9/9/2021C. Froelich of DeKalb County
"Greetings Joint Reapportionment Committee Members, Based on reporting by the media the GA JRC will follow the same process used in 2010 which amounts to pro GOP gerrymandering. You may win this battle but you will lose the war. The US is now is multiracial, multicultural and multireligious and will only become more so. You need to apportion to accommodate all voters not just your 1 percenter backers and the MAGA 'base'. Thank you"

9/9/2021A. Martin of Fulton County
"Please use an independent, non-partisan commission to oversee redistricting in order to reduce and eliminate gerrymandered districting practices. All people should have appropriate representation."

9/9/2021V. Jones of Gwinnett County
"Please use an independent non-partisan commission to fairly represent all Georgians. This stance would be in keeping with a large number of states in the U.S. If Georgia's leaders are truthful about their intent for the state to have free and fair elections, this should be a simple and fair policy to implement."

9/9/2021G. Moon of Cobb County
Ending Drug Prohibition in the United States of America Prohibition does not eliminate the market for illicit goods . Prohibitions do however increase violence and increase the risk for overdose . Further Homicide Rates are 25 to 75 percent higher than they would be in the absence of drug prohibition. One hundred years ago the Alcohol Prohibition Ended and it was the best thing American Politician Did To End Violent Gangs Alcohol Posioning From High Octane Liquor being produced illegally . People are dying in large quantities from small doses of Fentanyl a dangerous drug that should of never hit the streets in the past seven years it's made its way into innocent opiate addicts hands because they cant get the legal drug from a provider that keeps them from being deathly sick. Our kids are exposed to drugs at an early age and then we turn around & penalize them is insane. Our Dfcs juvenile judges are ripping & tearing apart American women & kids & forced to have no contact

9/8/2021S. Joseph of Fulton County
"Dictatorships control the outcome of elections to assure those in power remain in control by making sure voters’ wishes are distorted in their favor. In a democracy elections fairly reflect the votes of the electorate. Any time district alignment is manipulated to assure partisan wins, that is the action of would be dictators, not civil servants. Redistricting must be determined by independent, non partisan criteria. Please assure such pro democracy criteria are used in GA's redistricting processes."

9/8/2021R. Crumley of White County
"There are 3 representatives for a county with less than 40,000 people. When redistricting please consolidate the amount of house districts."

9/8/2021A. Corley of Muscogee County
"I have bodycam footage of the kidnapping that was concealed during the TPR. I have SAAG Kent Lawrence and Mathias Skrowneak signatures on orders that they prepared for the Judges to sign. Kidnapping is a felony and placing my daughter up for an unlawful adoption is human trafficking. I have everything properly documented and authenticated with certification and seal. I also have audio recordings. Gov. Kemp was forwarded everything from Senators Johnny Isakson and Kelly Loeffler’s office as, federal government had to give the the State opportunity to investigate before they could. Gov. Kemp can do something as, he appointed the Commissioners for DHS. Gov. Kemp can do something as, he is head of the State of Georgia and is the executive level. Gov. Kemp had the authority and responsibility to enforce the laws made by the General Assembly. The executive branch which Gov. Kemp is under is defined as: Executive Georgia’s main executive official and head of state is the governor."

9/8/2021A. S of DeKalb County
"Districts should be fairly drawn to represent our state, which is 50/50 at this time. Please use an independent non-partisan commission to fairly represent all of us, not just rural areas. Cities deserve to have their voices heard as well."

9/8/2021P. Woodley of DeKalb County
"I want maps that meet the fairness guidelines laid out by the Princeton Gerrymandering Project. Ultimately, we must have a non-partisan commission to determine districts rather than the legislature."

9/8/2021E. Murray Jr of Forsyth County
"Please consider the Seventh District the District anchored by Lake Lanier. North Gwinnett, Forsyth, part of Hall and Dawson counties would make an exceptional district. It would be and outstanding example of American and Georgian political exceptionalism. Thank You for your consideration and your time, patience and service on this committee."

9/7/2021J. Cassidy of Forsyth County
"As a resident of Forsyth County, I am disappointed by our current liberal representation in congress. By lumping us in with Gwinnett County, we are not being represented appropriately in regards to our needs and community desires. When considering the 2021 Reapportionment maps and lines, I ask that you consider these factors. It is the needs of a community that you should be considering before the needs of special interest groups. We need representatives that understands the needs for all the citizens of Georgia and not a subset of people based on ethnicity or race. Thus, I ask that you work hard to include whole communities and combine with other Communities/Counties with similar needs that rely on similar resources for both economic and community needs. Thank you. John C., Forsyth County"

9/4/2021D. Wolhart of DeKalb County
"Please use the Princeton Gerrymandering Project’s benchmarks to ensure fairness in districting maps. The citizens of Georgia deserve transparency, objective data, and fair maps. Gerrymandering is nothing more than legal cheating, unethical in the extreme."

9/4/2021G. K of Forsyth County
I am in district 7 and live in S. Forsyth County. One of the reasons we moved here was to live in a conservative county. Now we have a liberal Democrat representative because we are lumped in with Gwinnett County. She does not represent the interests of most of the citizens of S Forsyth County. Please keep Forsyth County whole. Or include some of Dawson or Hall if necessary.

9/3/2021K. Yoder of Forsyth County
"When considering the 2021 reapportionment maps, I ask you to consider our resources like Lake Lanier among others that make us a community. Please do not consider these lines based on race or ethnicity. It is the need of the community and not special interest. We need representatives that understand these needs for us and not a subset of people. Thank you."

9/3/2021D. Hancock of Gwinnett County
"I do not envy the job you face, but I hope that as you begin the process that you focus on ""preserving the integrity of political subdivisions, maintaining communities of interest, and creating geographical compactness."" Keeping communities together will minimize the number of residents who feel disenfranchised because, like me, they are now in a district with an elected official who does not represent their interests. My area of Gwinnett County (Suwanee) has more in common with northern Forsyth and even Hall County than we do with the southern or far eastern portion of Gwinnett. And while it may seem radical, I would also ask that you consider only legal citizen population and voter-eligible population when you draw districts as a matter of fundamental fairness. These residents should not be considered when updating district boundaries and trying to equalize the number of voters in each district. Thank you!"

9/3/2021B. Morris of Forsyth County
"The 7th district should include Forsyth County and not Gwinnett county. The 2 are polar opposites in people, culture, beliefs. Unfortunately, the way the lines are now drawn, the good people of Forsyth county are sadly being represented by a left wing iberal socialist that DOES NOT share our beliefs and values."

9/2/2021B. Joe of Sumter County
"twas a while ago but i still can remember dont know me months but i know twas september im a member of the snowman with a knife gang, set a metephorical fire, havnt seen the last ember of my actions, cant do fractions, yeah i got a detraction."

9/2/2021J. C of Macon-Bibb County
i love cracking and packing

9/2/2021M. Boggs of Fulton County
I am against cracking and packing!!

9/2/2021J. Harrell of Forsyth County
"It is time that all of Forsyth County is in the same Congressional District. If you make a Congressional District out of counties that border Lake Lanier it could look as follows. Take all of Forsyth, Hall and Dawson counties and about 200,000 from north Gwinnett. That is almost enough and it still leaves Gwinnett enough for its own Congressional District. Thank you for your consideration."

9/2/2021E. Foltz of Fulton County
"Independent redistricting commission that is designed to promote core values like independence, inclusivity, good-faith negotiation, and transparency. It is critical to protect our community interests and guards against partisan and racial gerrymandering."

9/2/2021D. Woodworth of Fulton County
"https://davesredistricting.org/maps#state::GA Here's a good resource for redistricting in our state. Please don't transparently gerrymander and please be prepared to show and explain your reasoning for drawing the districts whichever way you decide. Voters should choose their representatives, not representatives choosing their voters."

9/2/2021L. Taylor of Cherokee County
"Please add verified independents to the redistricting committee. If you will contact me, I can provide the names of individuals that collected signatures to run as independents. Redistricting needs a large independent presence. Luanne Taylor Independent Candidates in Georgia, USA."

9/2/2021T. Singer of Cobb County
Please use the Princeton Gerrymandering Project’s benchmarks to ensure fairness in districting maps. This should be nonpartisan.

9/2/2021J. Vashi of Fulton County
"Please create fair districts, not gerrymandered districts intended to benefit any one party. Gerrymandering must end if we are to keep our republic and preserve democracy. That's what I'm concerned about most. Some districts may naturally be predominant to one party. But for metropolitan areas, naturally having a strong mix of party affiliations, create fair districts, where it is up to everyone to get out the vote."

9/2/2021J. Bug of Bacon County
Could you please get rid of every district besides Speaker Ralston’s? He’s such a great leader … we only need 1 Representative for all of Georgia! Please give him all the legislative leave he needs…he needs to continue to protect those rapists!

9/1/2021A. Wilson of Forsyth County
"As a resident of Forsyth County, I see a great commonality of the people and communities throughout the County. We all rely on Lake Lanier for our water needs and numerous other items that make us a community. When considering 2021 Reapportionment, I ask that you consider these factors and the importance of representatives understanding these needs for us the citizens. Thus I ask that you work to keep Forsyth whole and complete and combine us with other Counties that like us rely on Lake Lanier itself for both economic and community needs (e.g. Gwinnett and Hall Counties). Thank you. Alice Wilson."

9/1/2021J. Sky of Fulton County
"Please create fair districts, not gerrymandered districts intended to benefit any one party. Gerrymandering must end if we are to keep our republic and preserve democracy. That's what I'm concerned about most. Some districts may naturally be predominant to one party. But for metropolitan areas, naturally having a strong mix of party affiliations, create fair districts, where it is up to everyone to get out the vote. I'm so sick of the Republican party rigging Georgia's voting system just because they do not accept a Democratic win because Democrats turned out more numbers of its voters to the polls. That is democracy, fair and square. I lived and voted in Atlanta throughout the 1990s. I moved back to the city 5 years ago. Today, demographics are shifting...and fair districting is needed more than ever."

9/1/2021J. Sky of Fulton County
"Please create fair districts, not gerrymandered districts intended to benefit any one party. Gerrymandering must end if we are to keep our republic and preserve democracy. That's what I'm concerned about most. Some districts may naturally be predominant to one party. But for metropolitan areas, naturally having a strong mix of party affiliations, create fair districts, where it is up to everyone to get out the vote. I'm so sick of the Republican party rigging Georgia's voting system just because they do not accept a Democratic win because Democrats turned out more numbers of its voters to the polls. That is democracy, fair and square. I lived and voted in Atlanta throughout the 1990s. I moved back to the city 5 years ago. Today, demographics are shifting...and fair districting is needed more than ever."

9/1/2021R. Moyers of Forsyth County
"I live in South Forsyth County, currently District 7. I am a Republican who moved to Forsyth County to be part of a conservative county with conservative representation. It worked for a while. However, the majority of District 7 is Democrat. A liberal Democrat won the last election, and is now my representative. She tried to take Georgia voting rights from us by co-sponsoring HR-1. This is not what we need for Georgia. It would be appropriate to expand District 7 northward into Forsyth County to bring more Republicans into District 7 and make it more balanced. We have a nice diverse community and want to keep it that way."

9/1/2021J. Tormey of Forsyth County
"The new districts should represent communities as a whole, and not certain special interest groups, ethnic groups, races, etc. Right now, our US House representative does NOT represent the voters of S. Forsyth county. We should be able to have representatives that represent a whole community. Do not draw lines based on what lobbyists or special interest groups recommend or demand. You need to ensure our representatives actually represent us and not gerrymandered lines based on enthicity or special interests. Forsyth County has a lot of activity based on Lake Lanier and the surrounding area. Unfortunately, I'm currently represented by a left-wing Dem from Gwinnett. Why? That needs to change."

9/1/2021B. Evelyn of Camden County
You need to punish Democrats to the best of your ability that meets lawful redistributing.

9/1/2021J. Hayes of Fulton County
"""There is nothing which I dread so much as a division of the republic into two great parties, each arranged under its leader, and concerting measures in opposition to each other. This, in my humble apprehension, is to be dreaded as the greatest political evil under our Constitution."" John Adams “The alternate domination of one faction over another, sharpened by the spirit of revenge, natural to party dissension, which in different ages and countries has perpetrated the most horrid enormities, is itself a frightful despotism."" George Washington Gerrymandering is Machiavellian: obviously wrong to everyone, justified in the name of power. A number of solutions exist, most of which depend on & prop up the two-party system that is eating America alive today. Districts must be redrawn on a lat/long grid and voting method must be changed from first-past-the-post to approval or ranked choice. We must be freed from the two party system, of which gerrymandering is part and parcel."

9/1/2021D. T of Habersham County
ENOUGH of Republican corruption!!!

9/1/2021T. Carter of Fulton County
"I'm legally disabled and have been severely abused from 2016 to 2021, in 5 states by a Suntrust Truist bank manager), his accomplices, with the help of several Atlanta Police Officers, Atlanta PD, Fulton County judges, public defenders, prosecutors. Several hospitals, a dentist ( Medicaid), city, county, state and federal agencies and some government officials knew what was happening and did nothing and have done nothing to help me to get FREEDOM JUSTICE AND A NEW LIFE. Got me into human trafficking, sex trafficking and drug trafficking because of the police and judges. I’ve been put in the hospital 3 times almost dying. Also have been hospitalized from the trauma 3 times too. Atlanta PD and Fulton County Courthouse has discriminated against me and have denied me help for 5 years. Im now homeless and suicidal and I’m currently at Emory for help."

9/1/2021M. Flemington of Forsyth County
"No more partisan Gerrymandering. Fair, transparent, logical redistricting is essential. Do the right thing !"

9/1/2021W. Jones of Camden County
"As you prepare to fulfill your official duty I pray that you will remember The Sovereign LORD is watching and “…this is what He requires of you: to do what is right, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with your God.” NLT"

9/1/2021L. Driscoll of Athens-Clarke County
"TRANSPARENCY. OBJECTIVE DATA. FAIR MAPS. Georgia residents deserve a redistricting process focused on citizens and communities, NOT the political-party-in-power-grab it has become ... on both sides of the aisle. Voters are watching!"

8/31/2021M. Grand of Forsyth County
Please keep the process transparent and produce a map that does not split communities. There should not even be the appearance of gerrymandering.

8/31/2021D. C of Fayette County
"Please consider split line districts. And make sure counties, cities, and communities aren't split. https://rangevoting.org/SplitLR.html Best Wishes"

8/31/2021C. BOURQUIN of Forsyth County
"The process should be NON-PARTISAN, and TRANSPARENT. It should be based on geography/population and nothing else. I'd like to see district boundaries drawn by an unbiased mathematical algorithm instead of politicians with a vested interest in the outcome. I'm very glad too see so many similar comments here. WE THE PEOPLE are FED UP with all the political shenanigans (from both parties) that go into redistricting. Voters should choose their representatives; representatives should not be able to choose their voters!"

8/31/2021R. Smith of Athens-Clarke County
"Our democracy is too important right now to risk it perpetuating undemocratic practices like gerrymandering to ensure incumbents remain in office. It should be illegal to split small counties and small cities and towns into multiple districts. When incumbents control and select their voters, most voters in that incumbent's district are deprived of their voices. Those incumbents are more inclined to listen to voices at the extreme or to fat-cat donors. This is unfair and will ultimately destroy democracy. SAVE AMERICA'S DEMOCRACY!!"

8/31/2021C. Masak of Cherokee County
"The goal of reducing and eliminating gerrymandered districts in order to provide true community representation should be the primary goal of any redistricting process. An independent, non-partisan commission or research entity leveraging artificial intelligence and big data should manage the process."

8/31/2021S. Furphy of Forsyth County
"Forsyth County GA is one of the fastest growing districts in the USA and we should have consolidated representation for the entire county. This will support its locally elected officials and citizens get more accomplished with streamlined leadership. I have rarely been successful in any business where I work under multiple bosses. One Consolidated Voice for Foco! Elected Leadership closest it’s constituents works best, that’s the wisdom of our founding fathers"

8/31/2021G. Liddick of Fulton County
"Amending our process to require approval by an independent commission is the only way to ensure fairly drawn districts that won't seesaw every ten years depending on who is in power after the censuses. A litany of states, including Virginia, Washington, California, Colorado, Arizona, Michigan, and others have shifted redistricting responsibility to independent commissions and Georgia should do the same."

8/30/2021J. Dufort of Morgan County
"Big Data has weaponized hyper-partisan gerrymandering. It's a tool used to thwart the will of voters, and is wrong no matter which party does it. Maps should be compact, should keep communities intact, and should be as competitive as possible - so politicians have incentives to represent all their voters. Does GA want to be known for leading democracy, or thwarting it? Choose wisely."

8/30/2021A. Nettles of Macon-Bibb County
"COMMIT TO: — Adopting non-partisan, objective redistricting standards, including fair, NON-PARTISAN examples of GA maps based on current census data. — Drawing districts that protect representation of *minority voters* & reflect GA’s changing political identity. — A fully transparent, engaged public process. Waive secrecy provisions re legislative/staff redistricting work! Show us your work & list all factors used, including demographic/political. Provide translations. Hold public hearings after initial map drafts. Elicit, and be accountable to & provide enough time for public feedback.Listen to the public input. Be FAIR to all voters, and all Districts."

8/30/2021L. Reif of Fulton County
"I am very concerned that this redistricting will not be fair & non-partisan. This Republican legislature already passed a law to make it more difficult for many to vote. How can I trust that they will not try to change the districts to favor their party? I live in 06 & concerned that they will try to redistrict To eliminate Democratic seats. In a stable democracy the voters pick their representatives not the other way around. This process must be fair & transparent, the Georgia voters & the country will be watching. Thank you."

8/30/2021L. Stinson of Fulton County
"The redistricting process should be fair, non-partisan and transparent. I urge the committee to keep our communities intact. Legislative representation should focus on specific issues, needs and concerns that affect the residents in our neighborhoods. Communities should not be reconfigured where residents do not have similar goals that can be addressed by the legislative body. I ask for a non-partisan, transparent, and fully accountable process; nothing more and nothing less."

8/30/2021M. Missett of Fulton County
"It’s unacceptable to attempt a partisan takeover of GA06, GA07 & GA02 by manipulating maps & dividing communities, instead of competing to win voters with good policies. Politicians choosing voters compromises the basic principles of our representative democracy. Don’t erase the representation of people of color & students to privilege 1 party’s power. Don’t disenfranchise us with tricks like packing & cracking. COMMIT TO: — Adopting non-partisan, objective redistricting standards, including fair, nonpartisan examples of GA maps based on current census data. — Drawing districts that protect representation of minority voters & reflect GA’s changing political identity. — A fully transparent, engaged public process. Waive secrecy provisions re legislative/staff redistricting work! Show your work & list all factors used, including demographic/political. Provide translations. Hold public hearings after initial map drafts. Elicit, be accountable to & provide enough time for public feedback."

8/30/2021A. Santos of Henry County
"A fair, nonpartisan and transparent process of redistricting is a requirement for democracy. Anything less is unacceptable."

8/29/2021D. Dulin of DeKalb County
"The redistricting process should be fair, non-partisan and transparent. I urge the committee to keep our communities in tact. This makes it easier to have a legislative representative that can focus on specific issues, needs and concerns that affect the residents within those neighborhoods and communities. Communities should not be divided and placed with other communities where residents do not have anything in common or similar goals etc. I ask for a non-partisan, transparent, and fully accountable process; nothing more and nothing less."

8/29/2021R. Hutchinson of Fulton County
"Obviously, the redistricting process must be nonpartisan. The party in power has an unavoidable conflict of interest in drawing lines, especially with the US Supreme Court's express green-lighting of partisan gerrymandering. It's undemocratic and just plain ugly, regardless which party is in power. And the process must be both transparent AND responsive. Citizens have a right, not just to be ""heard"" (and ignored), but to have meaningful input. No commission, no matter how well-meaning, will have a sufficiently detailed understanding of Georgia's communities at the local level. The plan needs to go through multiple iterations to reach a fair conclusion."

8/29/2021M. Wiltse of Columbia County
"Any comment based on the perception that an individual or group is representing a race, religion, gender, ethnic group, etc. should be ignored. There are many individuals that do not submit to these individuals speaking on their behalf. The phrase ""communities of interest"" is often used for that purpose, but a real community of interest is based on geography, not skin color or religion. In addition, there is a misuse of the term ""gerrymandering"", being defined by something only done by the political party currently in the majority. If one were to look back on the district maps of only 10-20 years ago, you will see who the real abusers of redistricting are."

8/29/2021J. Bible of Columbia County
"Please disregard all the comments from non-registered voters and non-citizens of Georgia and America. If a person calls themselves Irish-American or African-American or any other -American indicating their home country is more important than America their opinion should not matter. It is time to have only Georgians decide what is best for Georgia, not outsiders."

8/27/2021D. Sanders of Rockdale County
"6. Public engagement in the mapping process with expert support 7. Holding the Georgia Reapportionment Committee and Office accountable for: ▪ Providing relevant information about the process. ▪ An updated website with Redistricting Guidelines, Principles and Rules. ▪ Online public access to maps and other relevant data. ▪ Release and publication of the PowerPoint on how the public can participate gathering precinct, incumbent and other data. ▪ Define Communities of Interest so that there is less opportunity for partisan criteria. 8. Creation of a Legislative Record which documents the interests and priorities of our voters."

8/27/2021D. Sanders of Rockdale County
"The Rockdale County Democratic Committee support the fact that district maps in Georgia must be drawn fairly and accurately to reflect the will of voters. o Voters should pick who represents them – not the other way around. o This process and the eventual maps affect Georgians significantly – at the voting booth, and in their everyday lives. So, it's important we get it right. WE ADVOCATE FOR THE FOLLOWING: 1. A Non-Partisan Commission to handle Georgia Reapportionment / Redistricting. 2. Free public access to all maps being considered and time scheduled for public comment on each. 3. A Fair and Transparent processes beginning Now! 4. The voices of voters be heard before decisions are made and their input seriously considered. 5. Guidelines, Principles and Rules for Redistricting be published and include the following: ▪ Equal population per district ▪ Voting Rights Act Compliance ▪ Compact and Contiguous Districts ▪ Respect Communities of Interest ▪ Respect Political Subdivisions"

8/24/2021M. Wright of Rockdale County
"District maps in Georgia must be drawn fairly and accurately to reflect the will of the voters. A non-partisan commission should be established to handle reapportionment/redistricting. There should be free public access to all maps being considered and time scheduled for public comments. A fair and transparent process is needed as the voices of voters are heard. Guidelines, principles, and rules for redistricting should be published. Finally, there should be a legislative record to document the interests and priorities of all voters."

8/23/2021A. Engram of Rockdale County
"I advocate for the following:A Non-Partisan Commission to handle Georgia Reapportionment / Redistricting. 2. Free public access to all maps being considered and time scheduled for public comment on each. 3. A Fair and Transparent processes beginning Now! 4. The voices of voters be heard before decisions are made and their input seriously considered. 5. Guidelines, Principles and Rules for Redistricting be published and include the following: ? Equal population per district ? Voting Rights Act Compliance ? Compact and Contiguous Districts ? Respect Communities of Interest ? Respect Political Subdivisions 6. Public engagement in the mapping process with expert support 7. Holding the Georgia Reapportionment Committee and Office accountable for: ? Providing relevant information about the process. ? An updated website with Redistricting Guidelines, Principles and Rules. ? Online public access to maps and other relevant data. ? Release and publication of the PowerPoint on how the public can participate gathering precinct, incumbent and other data. ? Define Communities of Interest so that there is less opportunity for partisan criteria. 8. Creation of a Legislative Record which documents the interests and priorities of our"

8/23/2021B. Adle of DeKalb County
"I wish to express my hope that this year's Redistricting process will be transparent, fair and that the new maps will reflect the outcome of the 2020 Census."

8/23/2021K. Laurens of Cherokee County
"Cherokee County has suffered by not having a single State Senator from any of our local communities since 2013 because of how the county was split 10 years ago in the last reapportionment special session - 0/3. Luckily, we fared better in the House of Representatives (4/5 of the members.) For those keeping count that's only 4/8 overall in the General Assembly, as Cherokee Co residents in a county that was over 215k in 2011. Now you come to these same crossroads again and Cherokee has 266,620; please keep Cherokee together in as few House and Senate seats as possible and resist the urge to chop Cherokee into 10 house seats with 50/50 populations going into multiple other counties. Please resist the political pressure to dilute the Cherokee electorate into 5 or 6 State Senate seats. Our citizens deserve to be represented by individuals from our communities."

8/22/2021S. Williams of Rockdale County
"Let's not forget this is America. The idea of our democracy is ""Govt of the people, By the people, and, For The people!"" One man, one vote. People with common needs, desires and dreams having the equitable opportunity to have their voices heard. Cracking and Packing violates that. Reapportionment and Redistricting must not be manipulated to favor a particular party or class. It must be as contiguous as possible to represent people with similar circumstances, something in common!."

8/23/2021Q. Washington of Rockdale County
"PREFACE: The Rockdale County Democratic Committee support the fact that district maps in Georgia must be drawn fairly and accurately to reflect the will of voters. o Voters should pick who represents them - not the other way around. o This process and the eventual maps affect Georgians significantly - at the voting booth, and in their everyday lives. So, it's important we get it right. WE ADVOCATE FOR THE FOLLOWING: 1. A Non-Partisan Commission to handle Georgia Reapportionment / Redistricting. 2. Free public access to all maps being considered and time scheduled for public comment on each. 3. A Fair and Transparent processes beginning Now! 4. The voices of voters be heard before decisions are made and their input seriously considered. 5. Guidelines, Principles and Rules for Redistricting be published and include the following: ? Equal population per district ? Voting Rights Act Compliance ? Compact and Contiguous Districts ? Respect Communities of Interest ? Respect Political Subdivisions 6. Public engagement in the mapping process with expert support 7. Holding the Georgia Reapportionment Committee and Office accountable for: ? Providing relevant information about the process. ? An updated website with Redistricting Guidelines, Principles and Rules. ? Online public access to maps and other relevant data. ? Release and publication of the PowerPoint on how the public can participate gathering precinct, incumbent and other data. ? Define Communities of Interest so that there is less opportunity for partisan criteria. 8. Creation of a Legislative Record which documents the interests and priorities of our voters,."

8/21/2021P. Gaur of Rockdale County

8/21/2021R. Oden of Unknown County
"The RCDC supports the fact that district maps in Georgia must be drawn fairly and accurately to reflect the will of voters. We advocate A Non-Partisan Commission to handle Georgia Reapportionment/Redistricting. Free public access to all maps being considered and time schedule for public comment on each. A fair and transparent process beginning now. The voice of voters be heard before decisions are made and their input seriously considered. Guidelines, principles, and rules for redistricting be published and include the following: Equal population per district Voting Rights Act Compliance Compact and Contiguous Districts Respect Community Interest Respect Political Subdivision Public engagement in the mapping process with expert support. Holding the Georgia Reapportionment Committee and Office accountable for: Providing relevant information about the process. An updated website with Redistricting Guidelines, Principles and Rules. Online public access to maps and other relevant data. Release and publication of the PowerPoint on how the public can participate gathering precinct, incumbent and other data. Define Communities of Interest so that there is less opportunity for partisan criteria . Creation of Legislative Record which documents the interests and priorities of our voters."

8/21/2021F. Woodard of Unknown County
"I would like for this process to be fair and transparent. It should be done in a Nonpartisan way. Therefore, a commission needs to be setup to conduct this entire process. The voices of the voters of Rockdale county should be heard. Not just one side but all voters. Everything must be available for the public to review and comment on. The Ga Legislative should not have all the say in this matter. Public engagement in the mapping process should be available and encouraged. The Georgia Reapportionment Committee and Office should be held accountable. A record should be kept of and available for the public to review. Thanks for your time."

8/21/2021Z. Williams of Rockdale County
"PREFACE: Rockdale Strong! Our Voice. Our Vote. REAPPORTIONMENT / REDISTRICTING 2021 TALKING POINTS The Rockdale County Democratic Committee support the fact that district maps in Georgia must be drawn fairly and accurately to reflect the will of voters. o Voters should pick who represents them - not the other way around. o This process and the eventual maps affect Georgians significantly - at the voting booth, and in their everyday lives. So, it's important we get it right. WE ADVOCATE FOR THE FOLLOWING: 1. A Non-Partisan Commission to handle Georgia Reapportionment / Redistricting. 2. Free public access to all maps being considered and time scheduled for public comment on each. 3. A Fair and Transparent processes beginning Now! 4. The voices of voters be heard before decisions are made and their input seriously considered. 5. Guidelines, Principles and Rules for Redistricting be published and include the following: ? Equal population per district ? Voting Rights Act Compliance ? Compact and Contiguous Districts ? Respect Communities of Interest ? Respect Political Subdivisions 6. Public engagement in the mapping process with expert support 7. Holding the Georgia Reapportionment Committee and Office accountable for: ? Providing relevant information about the process. ? An updated website with Redistricting Guidelines, Principles and Rules. ? Online public access to maps and other relevant data. ? Release and publication of the PowerPoint on how the public can participate gathering precinct, incumbent and other data. ? Define Communities of Interest so that there is less opportunity for partisan criteria. 8. Creation of a Legislative Record which documents the interests and priorities of our Voters"

8/19/2021R. Hubbell of Fulton County
"Georgia Congressional district 5 needs to change. Nikema Williams has done nothing for us but send generic letters of subjects completed unrelated to our request. For the ten years I haved lived in North Atlanta, not one of my votes elected any of the winning representatives. Sadly, the crime up north makes us all all victims of gross mismanagement. The problem is South Atlanta's population is larger filled with multi family units and who they decide. They want affordable housing...meaning more multifamily units in Buckhead. This does NOT represent our views, beliefs, or vision of the future. I did not vote for Keisha Lance Bottoms, the worst Mayor besides Kasim Reed and frankly, Im tired of my vote not counting. Thank you for this opportunity."

8/19/2021C. O'Donnell of DeKalb County
"The redistricting process should be transparent, keeps community of interest the same, not violate vra and not take particianship into account"

8/19/2021C. Johnson of Rockdale County
"The Rockdale County Democratic Committee supports the fact that district maps in Georgia must be drawn fairly and accurately to reflect the will of voters. This includes: A Non-Partisan Commission to handle Georgia Reapportionment / Redistricting; Free public access to all maps being considered and time scheduled for public comment on each; A Fair and Transparent processes beginning Now!; The voices of voters be heard before decisions are made and their input seriously considered. Additionally there need to be Guidelines, Principles and Rules for Redistricting that are published and include the following: ? Equal population per district ? Voting Rights Act Compliance ? Compact and Contiguous Districts ? Respect for Communities of Interest ? Respect for Political Subdivisions. * Creation of a Legislative Record which documents the interests and priorities of our voters."

8/19/2021R. Wilson 2020 of Unknown County
"PREFACE: Rockdale Strong! Our Voice. Our Vote. REAPPORTIONMENT / REDISTRICTING 2021 TALKING POINTS The Rockdale County Democratic Committee support the fact that district maps in Georgia must be drawn fairly and accurately to reflect the will of voters. o Voters should pick who represents them - not the other way around. o This process and the eventual maps affect Georgians significantly - at the voting booth, and in their everyday lives. So, it's important we get it right. WE ADVOCATE FOR THE FOLLOWING: 1. A Non-Partisan Commission to handle Georgia Reapportionment / Redistricting. 2. Free public access to all maps being considered and time scheduled for public comment on each. 3. A Fair and Transparent processes beginning Now! 4. The voices of voters be heard before decisions are made and their input seriously considered. 5. Guidelines, Principles and Rules for Redistricting be published and include the following: ? Equal population per district ? Voting Rights Act Compliance ? Compact and Contiguous Districts ? Respect Communities of Interest ? Respect Political Subdivisions 6. Public engagement in the mapping process with expert support 7. Holding the Georgia Reapportionment Committee and Office accountable for: ? Providing relevant information about the process. ? An updated website with Redistricting Guidelines, Principles and Rules. ? Online public access to maps and other relevant data. ? Release and publication of the PowerPoint on how the public can participate gathering precinct, incumbent and other data. ? Define Communities of Interest so that there is less opportunity for partisan criteria. 8. Creation of a Legislative Record which documents the interests and priorities of our voters."

8/19/2021C. Brown of DeKalb County
"It is critical that we use a non-partisan system to draw districts, one that makes fewer districts safe for Democrats or Republicans and draws politics toward the center rather than the edges."

8/19/2021R. Ridgeway of Rockdale County
"I join the Rockdale County Democratic Committee in supporting the fact that district maps in Georgia must be drawn fairly and accurately to reflect the will of voters. Voters should pick who represents them - not the other way around. We Advocate for: 1. A Non-Partisan Commission to handle Georgia Reapportionment / Redistricting. 2. Free public access to all maps being considered and time scheduled for public comment on each. 3. A Fair and Transparent processes beginning Now! 4. The voices of voters be heard before decisions are made and their input seriously considered. 5. Guidelines, Principles and Rules for Redistricting be published and include the following: ? Equal population per district ? Voting Rights Act Compliance ? Compact and Contiguous Districts ? Respect Communities of Interest ? Respect Political Subdivisions 6. Public engagement in the mapping process with expert support 7. Holding the Georgia Reapportionment Committee and Office accountable for: ? Providing relevant information about the process. ? An updated website with Redistricting Guidelines, Principles and Rules. ? Online public access to maps and other relevant data. ? Release and publication of the PowerPoint on how the public can participate gathering precinct, incumbent and other data. ? Define Communities of Interest so that there is less opportunity for partisan criteria. 8. Creation of a Legislative Record which documents the interests and priorities of our voters. Thank you"

8/19/2021J. Evans of Gwinnett County
"We want conservative representation in our district, HOR 7th."

8/19/2021J. Evans of Gwinnett County
"We want conservative representation in our district, HOR 7th."

8/18/2021W. Fountain of Unknown County
I want to know what can be done to move us back into the Fayette County (R) district rather than being in the south Clayton County (D) area. Rep. Josh Bonner grew up right down the street from where we live and I cannot believe we are stuck in a district that does not reflect our neighborhood any longer. Please see what can be done to move us back in the Fayette County area rather than Clayton. Thank you!

8/18/2021L. Crawford of DeKalb County
Please make the redistricting process transparent and ethical.

8/17/2021H. Wilson of Richmond County
"My name is Haley Wilson and I am from Richmond County and I demand Georgia Legislation and Congress provide fair redistricting to its citizens. With voter suppression still finding its way into our elections, our senators need to make sure all persons' voices are being heard. I agree with Fair Districts GA and their policies regarding what fair redistricting is. Due to the now innate partisan nature, unfair redistricting will be worked more in favor of the politicians rather than the voters. I have worked in the voting polls for the last election (primary and run-off) and I have seen how harmful incautious redistricting can be to voters, especially for new voters like myself and older ones who may need assistance casting their ballots. I have seen people come to a poll location they have been going to for 20 years and suddenly they are placed at a new one with no notification even if they have not moved, and these new locations will be miles away from their homes. If a person were trying to vote between their work hours or maybe they do not have their own vehicle and take a bus, is it not inconvient for them to be told they must go to another location across town? This scenario is very likely given 63% of Georgia's population is in a civilian labor force. I have seen how quickly people will refuse to vote because there was a problem with their polling location or ballot. Therefore, our government should not only notify residents when their polling location changes but there needs to be more information given to citizens about voting. I have come across people in their late 20s to 30s who did not even know that one must register to vote before casting a ballot. People were not aware that voting must happen at specific locations and not just any one in the city. Lastly, if Georgia citizens are going to be subjected to redistricting it needs to be fairly and justly so that our votes are not being washed out due to the concerns of our legislative and congressional representatives. Georgia voters were the reason this last presidential election went the way it did. We stepped up and out to the polling locations to elect these officials and now it is time they do what is best for us. Thank you"

8/17/2021S. Smith of Macon-Bibb County
"As a citizen of Georgia, I am owed a fair redistricting process. The citizens of Georgia need non-partisan guidelines and oversight such as those suggested in the Princeton Gerrymandering Project. We need the ability to choose our elected officials and not have elected officials choose their voters. We need districts that are fairly drawn and do not create safe spaces for politicians to remain in office. We need elected officials to do the right thing and use fair benchmarks."

8/16/2021S. Roche of Macon-Bibb County
"We deserve maps that are not based on political considerations, but created following independent non-partisan guidelines or oversight. Use the benchmarks from the Princeton Gerrymandering Project's benchmarks!"

8/16/2021C. Seegert of Macon-Bibb County
I believe democracy requires districts that to not split towns/communities apart unnecessarily and facilitate more competition between Republicans and Democrats. Macon should not be divided into 5 districts. I also believe prisoners--who are ineligible to vote anyway--should not be counted as citizens of the geographic area of their imprisonment.

8/16/2021K. Roche of Macon-Bibb County
"I believe voting districts should be based on population and geography, not on efforts to separate neighborhood from neighborhood so that mostly Democrats or mostly Republicans make up the district. I believe much of the rancor in our legislature could be at least partially healed if its members answered to voters on both sides of issues, not primarily to one."

8/15/2021S. Todd of Newton County
It is imperative that the proposed maps be released ASAP so that citizens can have plenty of time to review them prior to the Special Session this fall. Please release them as soon as possible.

8/15/2021R. Gemmell of Gwinnett County
I just wanted to pass along my support for our northern Gwinnett county region staying in the 7th Congressional district. My understanding is we might merge with a part of Forsyth County that possesses similar demographics and public interests. That sounds like a logical plan that I would strongly support. I strongly oppose any concept or consideration of shifting us to the 6th district.

8/15/2021B. Lopez of Athens-Clarke County
"I moved to Athens about 3 years ago. At first, I didn't appreciate how knit tight our community was. I felt like a stranger even though I was welcomed with open arms. Now, even though I'm not a Athens native, I truly appreciate it for everything it is. The good and the bad. Dividing our community shuts off our voices. It doesn't honor the ""we"" that starts our constitution. I want to be part of the group that proudly will represent Athens. From North Avenue to Epps bridge. The re districting progress needs to be fair and transparent. To those making the decisions for the collective, make sure you don't contribute to voter oppression. Your community, the Athens community, counts on you."

8/14/2021T. Chao of Unknown County
"Please perform the fair districting. It should be a straightforward process of redrawing electoral boundaries so that every district has an equal number of people. Psalm 106:3 Blessed are they who observe justice, who do righteousness at all times!"

8/14/2021E. Holliday of Fulton County

8/14/2021D. Buehrer of Bartow County
Be transparent and allow the public access to this meetings!

8/13/2021S. Barnes of Henry County
Please support a forensic audit of the 2020 Presidential and Senatorial Elections. Thank you.

8/13/2021S. of Henry County
Please support a forensic aduit of the 2020 Presidential and Senatorial Elections.

8/13/2021C. Burlock of Cobb County
"I am contacting you as a concerned and empowered constituent of our state demanding that you give attention to the fact that our curren state govt. is plagued by dark money, partisan gerrymandering, voter suppression, unethical lobbyists, and other all-out attacks on the spirit and the letter of our state and federal Constitution. This has severely corrupted the purpose of govt. and the people's right to self-government and to the primacy of truth and ethics that undergird an enlightened and peaceful society. You will be hard pressed to prove how stopping the cheating in redistricting and allowing voters to choose their leaders and not the other way around. -is somehow bad for our constitutional democracy that enshrines fairness and equality before the law. Your legacy and voting record on this will be monitored and your efforts to either help or harm our democracy will never be forgotten. Please do the right thing. DISALLOW your commissions to be used to take away constitutionally-protected and sacred rights! DISALLOW your commissions to be used to dilute or concentrate voters unethically purely for the purpose of political power. Stop cheating!! Your actions defeat any moral claims or arguments you try to make on this very issue. Thank you."

8/12/2021J. Hartel of Fulton County
This process needs to be transparent. There needs to be a lengthly public comment period for all maps drawn in this process prior to any votes by legislators. Maps should be drawn by an independent nonpartisan entity. This form and future public comments need to be accessible in multiple languages. We have a diverse population and our maps and public comments need to be accessible to all.

8/12/2021J. Philipps of Unknown County

8/12/2021J. Irvin of Camden County
"While interesting, this topic is MOOT if we do not fix our broken election system. Any elected official that thinks ANY OTHER TOPIC is suitable for discussion at this time, is not on the side of patriotic Americans."

8/12/2021C. Froelich of DeKalb County
Districts should reflect population diversity and center around fairness to ensure all voters voices are heard at the same volume!

8/12/2021S. Futrell of Unknown County
"No community deserves any political, racial, and economic disadvantages due to unfair, unjust, and unrepresentative Redistricting. And we need to make sure the voices of all community members are heard, and our interests are represented in this process to protect and thrive our communities, not to protect incumbents and political interests. If this is too much democracy for you, please go ahead and secede again. I certainly won't fight it."

8/12/2021R. AbiSamra of Fulton County
"The committee should fully uphold the spirit of our democracy's ""one person, one vote"" promise. The leaders of this process should strive to lead reapportionment and redistricting with the same integrity and fairness as if they were in fact a nonpartisan, independent commission (which we have been told is the gold standard). Drawing lines that weaken or eliminate certain districts' existing representation should be neither a goal nor a byproduct of the process."

8/12/2021J. Truong of Unknown County

8/12/2021E. Phillips of Unknown County

8/12/2021H. Bahm of Gwinnett County
Please respect the results of the 2020 Census and make sure all of Georgia's diverse communities are respected and represented. Thank you!

8/12/2021F. Goff of Unknown County
"Gerrymandering is the ""Royalists'"" remedy against democracy. It's un-American NOT to thwart the GOP."

8/12/2021K. Reeves of DeKalb County
"No community deserves any political, racial, and economic disadvantages due to unfair, unjust, and unrepresentative Redistricting. And we need to make sure the voices of all community members are heard, and our interests are represented in this process to protect and thrive our communities, not to protect incumbents and political interests."

8/12/2021R. Limoges of Unknown County
We are Americans! Stop using us as political pawns. These outrageous redistricting decisions to try to ensure a certain party has a best chance to win are enraging. 1 person 1 vote. We must change the way in which our politics are run. Stop skewing redistricting. You have corrupted the whole concept of the electoral college to the point it has to be abandoned. This is on You!

8/12/2021K. Aker of Unknown County

8/12/2021S. Schmidt of DeKalb County
"We must perform redistricting to reflect our communities. No packing and stacking please. And no breaking apart of communities. We ask for transparency in how maps are drawn, and robust townhalls (held on weekends and after work hours) in which community members can provide feedback as the maps are being drawn."

8/12/2021K. Lee of DeKalb County
"I want TRANPARENCY and ACCOUNTABILITY in the redistricting process. Smaller cities should not be split between districts to dilute voting by communities-of-interest. Nor should the decisions be taken in order to protect and incumbent official. Be open and transparent about how the decisions are made, and communicate throughout the process. Elected officials should not be choosing their voters - voters should choose the officials!"

8/12/2021J. Weiss of Unknown County
"I urge you to draw up districts in a neutral, bipartisan fashion. To do so in such a way that disenfranchises any voters-particularly those of color-would be eminently unfair to the spirit, if not the laws, of a democratic society. It's time for lawmakers to consult their conscience, rather than adhering to the transparent, base motives for maintaining power. Thank you."

8/12/2021T. of Unknown County
"I agree with outgoing Korean Community Organizer Su Choe when she said: ""No community deserves any political, racial, and economic disadvantages due to unfair, unjust, and unrepresentative Redistricting. And we need to make sure the voices of all community members are heard, and our interests are represented in this process to protect and thrive our communities, not to protect incumbents and political interests."" It is in the best interest of democracy and all Americans to ensure everyone's vote is counted fairly."

8/12/2021D. Moore of Cherokee County
"We need fair non-partison districts. Let the voters choose their representation, not the other way around."

8/12/2021Z. Cross of Franklin County

8/12/2021R. Canada II of Cobb County
"I want to keep public hearings on redistricting, I don't want the Dictator Herr Kempen Fuhrer and his Nazi Repub Stormtroopers taking total control of Georgia."

8/12/2021J. Mayes of Athens-Clarke County
This is going be a fight that the GEORGIA GOP is going to win.

8/12/2021M. Collier of Hall County
"Georgia is ending its public hearings on redistricting today, before the Census Bureau has released crucial relevant data. Georgians are being denied the right to provide fully informed input on how legislative districts will be redrawn in their state. Georgians deserve a fair, transparent and equitable redistricting process. Given Georgia's history of gerrymandering, it is imperative that Georgia residents have the opportunity to review and comment on proposed legislative maps before they are voted on. Georgians are being unfairly kept in the dark about a redistricting process that will dramatically shape the future of the state for 10+ years. Fair representation is key to making sure that everyone in Georgia has the ability to access quality health care, attend quality schools, and travel safely along roads, bridges and railways."

8/11/2021G. Cowie of Athens-Clarke County
"To Redistricting Committee Chairs and Members: I've followed the public hearings that you're now completing and want to first thank you the time you've taken to listen to residents across the state. I'd also like to address quotes from committee members that I've seen in press coverage - quotes that indicate there is no way that the timeline for legislative action can allow for additional transparency. That view needs to be reconsidered and reconsidered immediately. It is not necessary to hold an extensive series of hearings like you have just done. There are many other ways to provide transparency. A few examples include releasing a proposed set of rules for the redistricting process before the special session and before action to finalize them; posting proposed maps and a statement of the criteria used for each map on the General Assembly's website; have a page on the website to submit comment on proposed maps; encourage people to contact their senators and representatives with comments on the rules for the process or on the proposed maps or have a dedicated email address and phone number for people to submit comments on proposed maps; posting detailed agenda that make expected actions clear before committee meetings; and hearing testimony on specific maps from advocates for and against them during committee hearings. Nothing prevents you from doing any of these. Indeed, the committee chairs and many members have made public statements about the value they place of fairness and transparency. Unless these are just empty words, the committee should take these or similar steps. I've worked with and for state agencies for decades and understand the effort it takes to make decisionmaking more transparent. I also understand the enormous importance of this process that happens every ten years, the importance for individual citizens and for the state and republic that we share. Do not simply point to the schedule as an obstacle to further action that helps people see and understand what is proposed and acted upon during the special session. Doing so would be a disservice to your constituents and to all residents of the state. Thank you."

8/11/2021D. Marain of Richmond County
"I just arrived home from the local Augusta redistricting hearing and I couldn't be prouder of my fellow Augustans. The diversity of viewpoints the Joint Committee heard from tonight is part of the reason that, though I only moved to Augusta in the past year, I have fallen in love with this city and am committed to living the rest of my life here. There were a couple issues not mentioned that I would like the committee to consider when drawing and approving maps for this area. Before I get into them, I want to reiterate the call for a process that solicits public input on the maps once they're drawn but before they're finalized. Proactive public education efforts are also vital. As a poll watcher this last election cycle, I helped numerous citizens who didn't understand why the polling place right down the street from them wasn't their correct polling place. One of the two trends I'd like the committee to consider when drawing and approving the maps for this area is exactly what Chairwoman Rich opened the hearing with: Columbia County is the 4th fastest-growing county in Georgia. Many of the industries and institutions fueling this population growth are located in Richmond or even Burke counties, but the legacy of the white flight era continues to enrich Columbia County in a self-perpetuating cycle. Just this year, with the judicial circuit split, we saw the Georgia Legislature grant Columbia County's request to crack our 150-year-old combined circuit. Columbia County received more than $1 million extra dollars in the state budget and was able to supplement salaries for workers in their new circuit with the higher local taxes they're able to collect, leaving Richmond and Burke counties with fewer resources and talented personnel going forward. Columbia County also split away from the combined library system five years ago, leaving Richmond County libraries poorer. And the school systems reflect the same trends. Richmond County is still the most populous in the Augusta region and our residents should not be forgotten, discarded, discounted, or left behind. Despite the innumerable connections between the counties in the CSRA, the federal House districts, the state House districts, and the state Senate districts mostly follow the county lines, meaning we elect separate elected officials who may not always consider the needs of the area as a whole. While following established political boundaries is part of the state redistricting guidelines, it is not strictly required and the Joint Committee may want to explore the implications of drawing maps that keep Columbia, Richmond, and Burke counties together given how many residents live their lives across all three. Which brings me to the second issue I didn't hear mentioned tonight. There are two prisons locally that house folks from across Georgia. The Legislature includes these folks in our population counts but they are not allowed to vote. Their inclusion in our population means more dollars flow into our community, but those dollars are not earmarked for services that could provide supportive and/or rehabilitative services to incarcerated people and their families. One or both of these injustices need to change. The legislature could allow incarcerated people to vote as Maine and Vermont do and ensure that funding dollars are earmarked to provide the services that would prevent criminal activity and recidivism. Many of the local historic figures and institutions we celebrate here in Augusta are known for their community investments and commitment to education (Lucy Craft Laney, Rev. C. T. Walker, Paine College, Morehouse College in its early days, etc). I'll end my comments by reminding the Joint Committee of these Augustan, these Georgian values as you go forward with the redistricting process, which will shape our community for the next ten years. To the best of your ability draw maps and use a process that promote equality, diversity, and empowerment for all the people you represent. Thank you."

8/11/2021E. Lichtenfeld of Cobb County
Voters should be allowed to have an independent transparent review of districts that keep communities together.

8/11/2021D. Pharr of Columbia County
"In the grand scheme of things, my request is just that our schools be rezoned so that our neighborhood (and the Williams Few Pkwy corridor) take advantage of schools with openings (Parkway Elem) in exchange for crowded schools (Lewiston Elem). This would afford for future growth which is bound to happen, and while these moves are upsetting to some, it is eventual, and would serve as a course correction. Thank you for serving, Lord knows the scrutiny isn't worth it at times, but we believe in our system of democracy and do not assume the worst in our elected officials/representatives. Thank you and stay safe/healthy!"

8/11/2021D. Veschi of Forsyth County
"Please allow for more public hearings on the redistricting process. A fair proposal would be to extend the period for hearings and input until the end of the federal fiscal year (9/30/21). Additionally, it would allow for two more months for the final 2020 census data to be published."

8/11/2021S. Bowles of Richmond County
I would prefer for the redistricting process to go through an independent commission to create unbiased maps for new districts in Georgia. This would help to ensure that districts are created fairly and don't lean towards being either Democratic or Republican because of any potential bias from either party.

8/11/2021F. Harris of Fulton County
We need more public hearings on the redistricting process. We need to combat gerrymandering so everybody's vote truly counts.

8/11/2021S. Lindemann of DeKalb County
We need further public hearings on redistricting AFTER the Census Bureau releases Georgia's redistricting data files.

8/11/2021P. Darden of Troup County
Please have more hearings on the redistricting process. I feel more openness is needed in the process.

8/11/2021S. Johnson of Harris County
"Please, we need more re0districting meetings"

8/11/2021L. Lindbeck of DeKalb County
"1. Adhere to 1 person 1 vote: there must be equal representation in each district with each vote counted the same. 2. District boundaries must comply with the federal Voting Rights Act: they may not discriminate on the basis of race, color, or membership in language minority group (Korean, Spanish, etc.). 3. District boundaries must reflect the State's diversity! Voters of color make up a significant portion of Georgia's population, and they must have the same opportunities to elect candidates of their choice as white voters do in districts throughout Georgia. That means no ""pack and crack"" redistricting. 4. The Princeton Center maps comprise a nonpartisan redistricting plan for Georgia, based on census data and historical data; these maps will be a litmus test for fairness in viewing the legislature's maps, so they should be carefully analyzed before maps are drawn. 5. More public hearings must be held with more of them virtual to minimize the exposure to COVID. 6. All data and methodologies must be publicly shared in an easily accessible format, downloadable and not requiring special map-reading software not commonly available. 7. Redistricting information must be publicly available in the non-English languages that are common in Georgia (Korean, Spanish, etc.). The voters are watching!!"

8/11/2021B. Parham of Unknown County
"Georgia representatives, I need for my vote to count because I am an American Citizen. ACLU please do whatever it takes to prevent the unfair representation of Georgia citizens. What happens when the DEMOCRATS are in the majority. IT WILL HAPPEN, THEN WHAT? Do you go back and forth with this process, based on what party is in the majority. NOTHING THAT BENEFITS GEORGIANS WILL GET DONE!!"

8/11/2021B. Brown of DeKalb County
"It's important that we provide transparency and fairness to the people of Georgia. As we continue to grow as a state, we should aim to include everyone equally in the redistricting process. Voters shouldn't be disenfranchised because of where they live or political parties attempting to hold on to power as new voters begin entering the electorate. It's now more important than ever that we make sure that new voters, and voters in general, are accurately represented in the communities that they live in. The redistricting process can have adverse negative effects that confuse voters, which results in lower voter turnout. When a district line is changed for a community member that has voted at the same precinct for 20+ years, with little to no notice, we've seen voters become less likely to vote. As we continue to advocate for voters rights for all Georgians, we want to make sure that tools like redistricting aren't used in tactics to suppress voters. A person's vote is one of the most important tools they have in changing their communities for the better. Everything from policies drafted, wages, healthcare, transportation, and laws begin with someone voting for an elected official to represent them. We will continue to be advocates for a fair and equitable voting process and part of that begins with a transparent and fair redistricting process."

8/11/2021C. Eisel-Elder of DeKalb County

8/11/2021J. Parmele of DeKalb County
"As a Georgia voter, I am appalled at the lack of transparency in the redistricting process. I demand that the state hold additional hearings and allow ample opportunity for voters to have their opinions heard."

8/11/2021C. Pietak of Cobb County
Be transparent and keep additional public hearings on the redistricting process.

8/11/2021P. DeTar of Clayton County

8/11/2021S. Colombe of Unknown County
Redistricting should be a public and transparent process that involves the constituents it affects. Public hearings should be scheduled after the release of the census data so that voters can give their input to the process that should enable fair elections and not marginalize any one.

8/11/2021I. Otero of DeKalb County
"August 11, 2021 The House Legislative and Congressional Reapportionment Committee and Senate Reapportionment and Redistricting Committee Coverdell Legislative Office Building 18 Capitol Square, Suite 402 Atlanta, Georgia 30334 Re: Written Testimony for the August 11, 2021 Town Hall in Augusta, Georgia Dear Chair Rich, Chair Kennedy, and Committee Members: The Southern Poverty Law Center (""SPLC"") is a non-profit, non-partisan organization dedicated to upholding the fundamental right of all citizens to vote and to ensuring that their vote is not diluted by unfair or unlawful redistricting plans. Today's hearing in Augusta is the final town hall scheduled by the House Legislative and Congressional Reapportionment Committee and Senate Reapportionment and Redistricting Committee (collectively, the ""Joint Redistricting Committee"" or ""Committee""). We write once again to implore the Joint Redistricting Committee to provide public input opportunities in which: 1) more Georgians can participate; and 2) Georgians can provide more meaningful input. We have repeatedly proposed specific steps the Committee could take to provide a more inclusive and productive public input process, but all proposals have been ignored. See, e.g., June 15, 2021 SPLC written testimony (requests for information to be provided in languages other than English; accessibility for those with hearing loss, wheelchairs, and compromised immunity; questions answered by the Committee; and an opportunity for public comment on the Committee's guidelines, 2020 Census data, and draft maps); July 30, 2021 SPLC written testimony (same). We have not been alone in voicing these concerns. According to Georgia Public Broadcasting's analysis of these town halls: Nearly 60% of the speakers called for fairness in drawing maps and 44% asked for more public input into the process. About 40% called for increased transparency, including public release of proposed maps and all of the information used to draw them. See Stephen Fowler, Sherry Liang, and David Armstrong, ""Here's What Georgians Had To Say About 2021 Redistricting At Town Halls Across The State,"" Georgia Public Broadcasting, Aug. 10, 2021, https://www.gpb.org/news/2021/08/10/heres-what-georgians-had-say-about-2021-redistricting-at-town-halls-across-the. The other themes most frequently communicated in oral testimony, according to Georgia Public Broadcasting, were race/ethnicity, shared values, process changes, changing demographics, and accessibility. See id. 2 Despite this barrage of public comment informing the Joint Redistricting Committee how it could improve the public input process, the Committee has thus far not modified the process by adopting any of these proposals. Which begs the question: if the Joint Redistricting Committee will not listen to the public's input on how to improve the public input process, will it listen to the public's input on how to improve the redistricting plans? See July 30, 2021 SPLC written testimony, Exhibit C (June 29, 2021 SPLC oral testimony) (expressing concern that the public input process was ""simply a pro forma exercise [for the Joint Redistricting Committee] to 'check the box' of saying [it] listened to the public""). The Committee's latest actions have continued its pattern of ignoring public input. First, the Committee declined to change the venue of today's town hall, despite community members' concerns that the venue is difficult to access by people using public transportation and by people with an ambulatory disability. See July 29, 2021 SPLC oral testimony, attached hereto as Exhibit A (""Community members have raised concerns that the pathway from the parking lot into the venue presents difficulty to those with an ambulatory disability. Moreover, the venue is not on a bus line and there are otherwise limited public transportation options to attend the hearing. As I understand it, community members have made this Committee aware of such issues, including through the submission of a petition, which recommends the hearing be moved . . .""). Second, the Committee rescheduled the Augusta town hall from August 30 to August 11, resulting in the Committee's town hall schedule concluding the day before the expected release of the legacy-format Census data.1 We have repeatedly requested that the Committee hold town halls after the 2020 Census data is released, and the rescheduling of this town hall appears motivated specifically by the Committee's desire to prevent the public from having the opportunity to testify with any Census data in hand. See, e.g., July 30, 2021 SPLC written testimony, Exhibit C (June 29, 2021 SPLC oral testimony) (""there must be an opportunity for public input after the Census data is released""). As we explained in our June 29, 2021 oral testimony, ""without Census data, [we] cannot propose district maps that we know will ultimately comply with federal and state laws."" See id. The Committee's refusal to hold a town hall after any Census data is released has the effect-and apparent intent-of limiting the scope of possible public input. The Joint Redistricting Committee's apparent disregard of public input is especially concerning because if public input is similarly disregarded when the redistricting plans are drafted and enacted, we fear that Georgia's history of diluting the voting strength of people of color will again be repeated. See June 15, 2021 SPLC written testimony. Georgia's history of discrimination against people of color in all facets of political participation-not just redistricting-is extensive and well-documented. See, e.g., Brooks v. State Bd. Of Elections, 848 F. Supp. 1548, 1560 (S.D. Ga. 1994) (""The history of the state['s] segregation practice and laws at all levels has been rehashed so many times that the Court can all but take judicial notice thereof.""). If the opinions of people of color are ignored, or worse, people of color will be deprived of a fair opportunity to elect the candidates of their choice, who would be more responsive to their needs. We hope the Joint Redistricting Committee will earnestly seek and implement public input-including from communities of color-and produce districting maps that provide fair representation for all. 1 We expect that the legacy-format Census data will be released August 12, 2021, and the full, comprehensive Census data will be released in late September 2021. 3 Sincerely, /s/ Jack Genberg Jack Genberg, Senior Staff Attorney Pichaya Poy Winichakul, Staff Attorney Kayla Kane, Data and Research Analyst Southern Poverty Law Center P.O. Box 1287 Decatur, GA 30031-1287 (404) 521-6700 Jack.Genberg@splcenter.org Poy.Winichakul@splcenter.org Kayla.Kane@splcenter.org EXHIBIT A Oral Testimony Delivered to the House Legislative & Congressional Reapportionment Committee and Senate Reapportionment and Redistricting Committee on July 29, 2021 at Mercer School of Medicine in Macon, Georgia Hello, my name is Pichaya Poy Winichakul and I am a Staff Attorney with the Southern Poverty Law Center. The SPLC is a non-profit, non-partisan organization dedicated to upholding the fundamental right of all citizens to vote. We continue to advocate for meaningful opportunities for public engagement. This means the ability to attach documents-like proposed maps-to any written submission to the Committee, which the Google form does not currently allow us to do. This also means in-language materials. The online submission forms are only provided in English, which makes the form inaccessible to the over 100,000 Georgians with limited English proficiency. Moreover, there has not been an ASL interpreter at any of the hearings, nor is there closed captioning when the hearings are streamed. Finally, meaningful public engagement also means responses to the public's reasonable questions-what are the Committee's 2021 redistricting guidelines? Will you provide additional opportunity for public comment and engagement following the release of Census data? While we understand the Committee's position that they want to hear from the public, the public has not learned anything new since the start of the hearing tour and without information from this Committee it is difficult for us to offer meaningful input on the redistricting process. Providing opportunities for the public to give meaningful input is especially important here in the Greater Macon area, where people of color make up an increasingly large share of the population. As a result, many giving testimony today, especially people of color, have come forth with important information about their communities of interest for your consideration. The Committee should work to preserve those enumerated communities of interest, particularly communities of color, and respond to the public's questions, generate or publish redistricting guidelines, and respond to requests for public testimony options after the Census data is released. I also want to raise two issues as we near the end of these summer town halls. First, I understand that the Google form continues to be the only way to submit written comments and that there is no deadline yet for submitting comments-but there will be one. Can the Committee commit to giving the public at least two weeks' notice-via the website, email, press release-before you close down the Google form website for written comment? Second, are concerns about the venue of the rescheduled Augusta town hall on August 30. Community members have raised concerns that the pathway from the parking lot into the venue presents difficulty to those with an ambulatory disability. Moreover, the venue is not 2 on a bus line and there are otherwise limited public transportation options to attend the hearing. As I understand it, community members have made this Committee aware of such issues, including through the submission of a petition, which recommends the hearing be moved to Augusta University's Maxwell Theatre and Auditorium, 2500 Walton Way or Augusta Technical College Information Technology Center Auditorium, 3200 Augusta Tech Drive. Could the public get a commitment from the Committee today that you will reconsider the August 30 hearing venue? Thank you for your consideration. I would be happy to respond to any questions the Committee members may have."

8/11/2021M. Smarr of DeKalb County
"The Census Bureau has stated that it will release Georgia's redistricting data files on August 12. No further public hearings are scheduled after today, August 11. Georgians are being unfairly kept in the dark about a redistricting process that will dramatically shape the future of the state for 10+ years. Fair representation is key to making sure that everyone in Georgia is able to access quality health care, quality education, and travel safely along roads, bridges and railways. Given Georgia's history of gerrymandering, it is imperative that Georgia residents have the opportunity to review and comment on proposed legislative maps before they are voted on. I ask that additional hearings be scheduled so that information can be shared and input obtained from Georgia residents."

8/11/2021E. Fogus of DeKalb County
I object to this closed door redistricting. Gerrymandering is a scourge and it's shameful that the representatives of my state aren't believers in the democratic system.

8/11/2021H. Gentry of Unknown County
"The Redistricting process must be transparent and subject to input by the voters WHILE the lines are being drawn. Holding the public out AFTER the Census data is received, is fake public involvement (ie appearance of public input) into this vital process."

8/11/2021R. Wright MD of Unknown County
"I believe that state or federal Congressional maps drawn to favor or disfavor any party or incumbent make a travesty of the entire electoral process that is the basis of our American system of government. Anything else is simply wrong, no matter how it is justified. To that end, the process of redistricting in Georgia should be turned over to an independent commission acting under well-constructed standards for fair and non-partisan reapportionment. I will be interested to hear what you believe and propose."

8/11/2021H. Mays of Fulton County
"Good evening, n this 11th day of August, the last day of your PUBLIC hearings. Thank you for holding PUBLIC hearings around the state about redistricting. Unfortunately, I have not been able to attend in person due to compromised health and lack of PUBLIC transportation. I had hoped and continue to hope that your solicitation of PUBLIC input be extended --or rather restarted-- after the census data is made available to the PUBLIC. I ask that you expand access to all of the information you have at your disposal to the PUBLIC so that we, the PUBLIC, can make specific comments on this very PUBLIC issue. Remember, in a democracy, the PUBLIC chooses our representatives. It's not the representative's right to choose the PUBLIC they want to serve. Thank you very much for entering my comments into the PUBLIC record. Hope Mays Mountain Park, GA"

8/11/2021E. Weis of Fulton County
"All Georgians should be confident that this State's Congressional Districts are drawn to fairly and equally represent each of this State's citizens. Interested citizens should have the opportunity to express their views. They should have access to relevant information so that they can intelligently formulate their views. The process of drawing the district boundaries must be opened and transparent. There should be public disclosure of information, public hearings and opened meetings."

8/11/2021C. Streisguth of Jackson County

8/11/2021C. Lee of DeKalb County
Government does not function for the people if its processes are not fully transparent to those who are governed. What is the purpose of having a Sunshine Law in the state if you circumvent it on important issues.

8/11/2021D. Denis of Cobb County
Equal voting rights for every human being!

8/11/2021R. Soller of Unknown County
I strongly encourage the Georgia General Assembly to schedule more public hearings for redistricting. It is critical that the people of Georgia are able to offer their testimony after the Census data is available.

8/11/2021C. Brownstein of Barrow County
Both political parties have done underhanded partitioning of the state in the past. The people are now saying it is time to stop. If you (whatever party) cannot win the seat fairly then you have the wrong message. WHAT ARE YOU HIDING?

8/11/2021B. Holland of Dawson County
Georgians deserve complete disclosure on redistricting. The final census is not coming out until August 12. We should have more hearings about the legislatures plans on redistricting after they receive the census data.

8/11/2021M. Demilio of Fulton County
Please allow public hearings on the redistricting process to continue beyond August 12 so that the public can be informed and included in the process.

8/11/2021A. Citrin of Fulton County
Please allow public input into redistributing to ensure the districts are not used as tools to politically advantage any political party. Let tge democratic process thrive if we want to stop out slide into becoming an autocracy

8/11/2021L. Seifert of Fulton County
Please do the right thing.

8/11/2021R. Hakes of Camden County
Further public hearings are needed.

8/11/2021J. Bernard of Fayette County
"redistricting must reflect the will of the people, not just politicos wanting to be reelected"

8/11/2021L. Stone of DeKalb County
"As a citizen of the United States and a resident of Georgia (for 49 years), I wish that you would make the process of redistricting fair, open to review and equitable. Don't become Jim Crow southerners! You have already changed the voting rights for many of us, so don't make another unjust and prejudiced decision."

8/11/2021R. Edgerton of Fulton County
We want transparency please

8/11/2021C. Larson of Forsyth County
There must be additional public hearings on redistricting.

8/11/2021C. Larson of Forsyth County
"Redistricting must be done fairly, without racial, ethnic, or political factors. Whole communities should be kept together. Do not make this a partisan exercise. Redistricting in Georgia should be done by a nonpartisan commission, rather than the legislature. As a resident of GA Congressional District 7, I believe that it should be kept intact and not subject to major changes."

8/11/2021A. Larson of Unknown County
All Georgia residents should have the opportunity to review and comment on proposed legislative maps before they are voted on. We need more hearings in more counties!!!

8/11/2021E. Fogus of DeKalb County
I object to this closed door redistricting. Gerrymandering is a scourge and it's shameful that the representatives of my state aren't believers in the democratic system.

8/11/2021E. Howard of Unknown County
it is imperative that Georgia residents have the opportunity to review and comment on proposed legislative maps before they are voted on

8/11/2021L. Zuk of DeKalb County
Redistricting will affect our lives for the next ten years. We must be able to comment about issues revealed by the 2020 Census! You need to expand the time for additional public hearings so that our voices can be heard - once we have the information we need from the Census Bureau.

8/11/2021M. Carr of Bartow County
"There were limited town halls for the re-districting before the data even came out. More accessible town halls or other means of input need to be there once data is out and process needs to be transparent. The majority of citizens want de-politicized, independent (non-party driven) re-disctricting! Thanks."

8/11/2021R. Hayden of Dougherty County
"What are Georgia legislators trying to hide by not scheduling any hearings on redistricting once the census figures are released - last hearing is Aug. 11, and the data comes out the next day. Not a coincidence, but typical of Republican gerrymandering. Show an honest face for a change - why are you afraid?"

8/11/2021J. Fiorito of Forsyth County
"Please do not vote on redistricting maps before the people of GA have had a chance to voice their opinions. Remember, you are representatives of the people!"

8/11/2021K. Spears of Unknown County
Please stop your inequitable behavior. Stop drawing lines to strengthen your power.

8/11/2021J. Bartley of Walton County
I would like to know the details of the redistricting plan because it is important that this process is both ethical and transparent.

8/11/2021T. Woodward of DeKalb County
Voters want an open redistricting process with continued public transparency!

8/11/2021F. Jewell of DeKalb County

8/11/2021C. Clements-Woodland of Rockdale County
Addition hearings need to be held. Many are unaware of your activity and it is a fundamental premise of this society that EVERYONE be given the opportunity to participate in this government. Taking totalitarian actions will absolutely destroy our country. Do right by Americans.

8/11/2021K. Marshall of Unknown County
"Please be transparent and keep the people informed as you redistrict. I am very concerned about the true intentions of the legislature performing this process; it should be done by a non-partisan committee. Since the legislators have passed laws that allow them to subvert the vote it's clear their interest is not fairness or what's best for the people. I continue to pray the Republicans will once again so true leadership and stop trying to steal elections. It's heartbreaking to see the GOP turn into a group of bullies who cannot actually lead so they are abandoning the guidance of our forefathers, subverting our democratic republic."

8/11/2021R. Hudgins of Chattooga County

8/11/2021D. Killorin of Chatham County
Please allow additional public hearings on redistricting!

8/11/2021M. Yura of DeKalb County
I strongly request additional public hearings on Georgia's redistricting process.

8/11/2021J. Perlmutter of DeKalb County
"With the Census releasing data on redistricting on 8/12, I am appalled to hear that Georgia is cutting off public comment and any further consideration today. I hope Georgia will reconsider this cutoff and allow comment and review through the end of August."

8/11/2021K. Luxner of Chatham County
"Please allow time for full public comments on your redistricting efforts in GA. As a voter, it is critically important that you attend to my concerns rather than your own greed!"

8/11/2021V. Kealy of Fulton County
"I have just learned that Georgia is ending its public hearings on redistricting today, before the Census Bureau has released crucial relevant data. This decision denies me and other Georgians the right to provide fully informed input on how legislative districts will be redrawn in their state. Georgians deserve a fair, transparent and equitable redistricting process. Please do not keep Georgians unfairly kept in the dark about a redistricting process that will dramatically shape the future of the state for 10+ years. Fair representation is key to making sure that everyone in Georgia has the ability to access quality health care, attend quality schools, and travel safely along roads, bridges and railways. Given Georgia's history of gerrymandering, it is imperative that Georgia residents have the opportunity to review and comment on proposed legislative maps before they are voted on. Please reinstate public hearings on redistricting, effective immediately."

8/11/2021M. Henley of Chatham County
"Does it make sense to make decisions on redistricting before all census information is available? I think not. Please, please wait until you have the relevant information so that whatever decisions are made will at least have some light of day."

8/11/2021L. Gardner of Unknown County

8/11/2021K. McQueen of Whitfield County

8/10/2021E. White of Unknown County
"Are the unemployment office in Georgia close? I cought coronaviruse at my job, and could not work for a while. I filed for temporary unemployment but my status never change from Pending. I call them no answer, I leave messages with my phone number, and they will not call back. I email them and they want email me back. What do I do now? Im in disbelief with the way the Georgia department of labor us treating the good people of Georgia. They should be ashamed. Can someone please help"

8/10/2021J. Jenkins of Unknown County

8/10/2021A. Sullivan of Richmond County
I'd like to submit this in efforts to support equality and progressiveness.

8/10/2021L. Rico of Unknown County
"Hello! Good morning I want to know if yall can help me with my daughter passport please I need to travel out of the country Friday because my dad is sick and I haven't got any respond back from her passport, it's been 8 weeks already. Can you guys help me please."

8/9/2021S. Jacobs of Burke County
"So much time an effort is obviously being put on holding political parties and control and next to nothing as it pertains to your actual constituents and their real life issues and concerns. Things are falling apart, education, fuel and electrical costs, the possibility of food shortages, COVID-19 and getting people back into the work force."

8/9/2021O. Grimes of Jones County
"I am a Christian and a country girl, just for someone to create a thought about me. I am not the normal type to be concerned about such matters but, I am continuing to be very concerned about climate change. About the impact our lives are having on our doom. I want to know how to make a difference. I feel it is in the hands of the people as well as the governing body of this great country. I suppose all I wish to say is that I wish the government gave guidelines and made changes to help stop the change as much as possible."

8/9/2021D. Betts of Montgomery County
Toombs and Montgomery Counties in SE Georgia need to stay whole and together in the 156th seat. I've been involved for over 35 years in our community's economic development and the bedrock for our current success has been these communities working together and acting together in all areas. Please don't hamper our efforts. It would end up costing us and the state financially and emotionally. Thank you for your consideration and good luck with your challenging job.

8/8/2021D. Ramsey of Walker County
Impeachment of Joe Biden and Kamala Harris they are killing my country and the open borders is spreading COVID if this goes unheard I will vote a Republican who will do the job get them out of office

8/8/2021P. Colemon of DeKalb County
"Good morning. I do not know whom to contact but am reaching out to members in my county for assistance. I have applied on behalf of my tenant for rental assistance. We have submitted all of the required documents and was in contact for a short time with the rental assistance program. The office, we were in contact with suddenly stopped communicating. I send an email weekly to rental assistance program but have not received a phone call, email or text from them. My tenant has children snd she has not been able to pay rent due to her previous diagnosis of having Covid. I am retired but had to return to part time employment to help her. I need help to help her and her children. I need help and sincerely request, beg fir help. Pamela Colemon (Tenant-Stefanie Watts) 678-492-9760. Please provide me some further direction, so that I can assist her. I know this maybe a small issue for you but I consider this a serious issue to help another family from being homeless. Thank you Pamela Colemon"

8/6/2021J. Genberg of Fulton County
"July 30, 2021 The House Legislative and Congressional Reapportionment Committee and Senate Reapportionment and Redistricting Committee Coverdell Legislative Office Building 18 Capitol Square, Suite 402 Atlanta, Georgia 30334 Re: Written Testimony for the July 30, 2021 Virtual Town Hall Dear Chair Rich, Chair Kennedy, and Committee Members: The Southern Poverty Law Center (""SPLC"") is a non-profit, non-partisan organization dedicated to upholding the fundamental right of all citizens to vote and to ensuring that their vote is not diluted by unfair or unlawful redistricting plans. On June 15, 2021-the day the House Legislative and Congressional Reapportionment Committee and Senate Reapportionment and Redistricting Committee (collectively, the ""Joint Redistricting Committee"") held their first town hall for this redistricting cycle-SPLC provided oral and written testimony which included several proposals that, if adopted, would allow more Georgians to participate and provide more meaningful input to the Joint Redistricting Committee. See June 15, 2021 SPLC written testimony, attached hereto as Exhibit A, at 3. Sadly, the Joint Redistricting Committee did not adopt any of these proposals. The predictable result was that the process excluded many Georgians-especially hard-to-reach communities and Georgians of color-and those who could participate were unable to offer input with updated Census numbers. The Joint Redistricting Committee has refused the numerous entreaties by SPLC and other organizations, including the ACLU of Georgia and Asian Americans Advancing Justice - Atlanta, to provide notice of the redistricting town halls in languages other than English. In our June 15 written testimony, we requested that all redistricting information-including notice of the town halls-be provided in languages other than English. See id. at 3 (""For any public input sessions . . . the Joint Redistricting Committee[] should . . . provide . . . information in languages required to reach diverse Georgians, but at least Spanish, Korean, Vietnamese, Mandarin/Cantonese, Hindi, Arabi and [American Sign Language]"".). When no changes were made to the English-only notice procedure, SPLC and 62 other organizations sent a letter to Chair Rich and Chair Kennedy in which we ""express[ed] our concern that the Joint Reapportionment Committee is not engaging in efforts to provide any language accommodations for the upcoming June 28th town hall,"" and noted that providing language access was ""not only the right step to take, but a legally required one"" under Section 4(f)(2) of the Voting Rights Act of 1965. See June 25, 2021 letter from the Georgia Immigrant Rights Alliance to the Chairs of the Georgia Joint Reapportionment Committee. This letter further noted that Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders represented a population of over 300,000 in Georgia, and forty-four percent of them have limited English proficiency. See id. Receiving no response to this letter, in our June 28 oral testimony at the Georgia State Capitol, we renewed our call for notice of the town halls to be provided in languages other than English. See June 28, 2021 SPLC oral testimony, attached hereto as Exhibit B. We expressed our ""disappoint[ment] that the Committees have thus far not accepted the suggestion we made in our June 15th testimony to provide information in languages other than English, so it is accessible to the over 100,000 Georgians with limited English proficiency,"" and asked Chair Rich and Chair Kennedy to ""commit to providing information about the redistricting process, including these town halls, in languages other than English[.]"" See id. Chair Rich and Chair Kennedy declined to respond to this question in person, but have since responded with inaction: a continued refusal to provide notice of the town halls in languages other than English. The result is that over 100,000 Georgians with limited English proficiency have been excluded from providing input into the redistricting process. Similarly, the absence of an American Sign Language interpreter at town halls and the absence of closed-captioned videos online forecloses people with hearing loss from the redistricting process. And several town hall venues have not been fully accessible for people with wheelchairs; these have included microphones only accessible by walking up or down steps. Public access has also been limited by holding all but two town halls in-person during a pandemic, and not allowing community members to sign-up to speak online, but rather only at 4:30 p.m. during weekdays. See Ex. A (""For any public input sessions . . . the Joint Redistricting Committee[] should . . . adopt uniform and transparent procedures for public testimony that ensure equal and full access for people with disabilities to provide input in-person as well as accessible remote testimony options for all hearings . . . and establish mechanisms for the public to sign-up in advance."") While we have repeatedly called for the Joint Redistricting Committee to allow more Georgians to provide input into the districting decisions that will determine their political representation, the Joint Redistricting Committee's process has not allowed any community members to provide input with updated Census numbers. The Joint Redistricting Committee begins each session with a short educational video on redistricting, then either assumes that community members are knowledgeable enough about redistricting to speak in a way that could guide the Joint Redistricting Committee's work, or does not care either way. These hearings are a one-way street, not a give-and-take: community members speak, and the members of the Joint Redistricting Committee sit silently. And, as Chair Rich and Chair Kennedy have repeatedly joked, community members get ""bonus points"" for speaking as little as possible. Community members have received almost no information from the Joint Redistricting Committee. The Joint Redistricting Committee has refused to answer questions. We have requested that questions be answered numerous times, first in our June 15 written testimony. See Ex. A (""For any public input sessions . . . the Joint Redistricting Committee[] should . . . engage in an informative and responsive process, for instance, by hosting Q & A sessions between Joint Redistricting Committee members and members of the public."") Perhaps the only time that Chair Rich or Chair Kennedy answered a question, was when a white man at the July 28 Columbus hearing asked basic questions about the redistricting process, and Chair Kennedy began to answer, but hesitated, and replied, ""We're not here to answer questions,"" and that people have asked questions, but ""we've not taken the time to engage."" In addition to refusing to answer basic questions that could allow community members to engage in a difficult process, the Joint Redistricting Committee has not published the guidelines that they claim will guide its districting decisions. So, even the community members who are more knowledgeable about redistricting have little idea what the Joint Redistricting Committee will purport to do. Moreover, holding the hearings before the full, comprehensive 2020 Census data is released forecloses community members and organizations from proposing their own redistricting plans. Of course, without knowing how many and which Georgia residents live in each census block, it is impossible to propose district maps that we know will ultimately comply with federal and state laws. See June 29, 2021 SPLC oral testimony, attached hereto as Exhibit C. The Joint Redistricting Committee knows, as Chair Kennedy stated at the June 28 town hall in Atlanta, that you ""can't do a lot until [you] collect the Census data."" See id. And the Google document form the Joint Redistricting Committee provided for the submission of written testimony does not allow community members to attach documents, which forecloses their ability to submit proposed redistricting maps, community of interest maps, or longer testimony that includes text and graphics. See id. In sum, the Joint Redistricting Committee has done nothing to mollify our concerns (first stated in our June 29 oral testimony) that, for the Joint Redistricting Committee, this town hall process is ""simply a pro forma exercise to 'check the box' of saying you listened to the public."" See id. We are disappointed by the Joint Redistricting Committee's refusal of all suggestions to make the public input process more inclusive and to allow for more meaningful input and engagement. While there has been no indication the Joint Redistricting Committee has listened to community members, we again encourage it to do so. The Joint Redistricting Committee can demonstrate it is listening to community input by adopting the changes community members have frequently requested during these town halls, including: * making the town halls more accessible to all Georgians, including those with limited English proficiency, hearing loss, wheelchairs, and compromised immunity; * answering questions; * releasing the Joint Redistricting Committee's guidelines as soon as possible; * promising to hold additional town halls after the full, comprehensive Census data has been released; * and providing transparency, including releasing all proposed redistricting plans to the public for comment before they are adopted, and all accompanying data relied upon in the Joint Redistricting Committee's decisions. Despite our well-founded concerns that the Joint Redistricting Committee is not seriously considering any community input, including ours, we continue to advocate for a fair redistricting process and fair redistricting plans because the consequences of these redistricting plans will be-and have historically been-so enormous for all Georgians, and especially those of color. In our June 15 written testimony, we offered a brief synopsis of Georgia's history of redistricting discrimination since the passage of the Voting Rights Act of 1965. See Ex. A. Georgia has historically diluted the voting strength of people of color, particularly Black communities. This vote dilution has denied people of color a fair opportunity to elect the candidates of their choice, who would be more responsive to their needs. We implore you to break from this shameful history. Receiving meaningful community input from all Georgians is a critical first step in pushing Georgia forward. We hope that you seriously consider our suggestions and strive to produce a public input process and districting maps that provide fair representation for all. Sincerely, /s/ Jack Genberg Jack Genberg, Senior Staff Attorney Pichaya Poy Winichakul, Staff Attorney Kayla Kane, Data and Research Analyst Southern Poverty Law Center P.O. Box 1287 Decatur, GA 30031-1287 (404) 521-6700 Jack.Genberg@splcenter.org Poy.Winichakul@splcenter.org Kayla.Kane@splcenter.org"

8/6/2021M. Dominy of Cobb County
I want a fair and transparent process. We the people should pick our representatives- not the other way around. Gerrymandering doesn't serve democracy.

8/6/2021S. Carlson of Floyd County
"Efforts to undermine voting rights are unfair, to say the least! We need fairness in apportionment."

8/5/2021J. Fox of Unknown County
"Thank you for the critical work you are doing on redistricting. Please make sure your maps stop gerrymandering. Gerrymanderers are deflecting from the importance of this fundamental goal. Redistricting criteria are very important. Gerrymanderers focus on some of these criteria and build maps that stress particular criteria AND the map is STILL GERRYMANDERED. Beware of this ploy. Do not allow gerrymanderers to implement other redistricting criteria in a way that hinders the eradication of gerrymandering. Please, keep your eye on the fundamental goal of stopping gerrymandering. Advocates of particular redistricting criteria should be aware that maps can be drawn that stop gerrymandering and achieve other redistricting criteria. But, in addition to advocating for particular criteria, make sure that gerrymandering is defeated and representative democracy prevails. The Guide to Fair Redistricting provides, for a wide range of states, examples of maps that advance specific redistricting criteria and prevent gerrymandering. https://preprints.apsanet.org/engage/api-gateway/apsa/assets/orp/resource/item/60e46f7ea4e06bf9217014db/original/fair-and-square-redistricting.pdf (more than 1500 views and 750 downloads) Best Wishes in the Pursuit of Fair Maps, Jim Fox"

8/5/2021M. Thomas of Jackson County
"When Georgia's political districts are engineered to be safe for either party, everyone loses. Without competitive general elections, only the primary matters. Georgians end up with representatives who are only interested in their district's activist base. Across Georgia, the quality of our Congressional delegation has declined as we've seen a proliferation of unqualified party loyalists who have little time for district issues. They're too busy seeking a national spotlight. I ask the Joint Reapportionment Committee to restore competitive general elections, in which qualified candidates must appeal to, and actually work for, all of a district's voters - not just those who vote in a party primary. This is healthy for both parties, for democracy, and for Georgia. Thank you for your consideration and for this opportunity to comment."

8/5/2021S. Small of Chatham County
Requesting and equitable and transparent redistricting process

8/4/2021N. Snow of Richmond County
Where common pleas and the due diligence are the progress gained for humanity's invested efforts if only to personify the freedom and hope of the American Spirit ..

8/3/2021S. Turner of Cherokee County
I have been waiting on a response for my unemployment benefits Appel since January 2021 as the Georgia Department of labor is failing their Community!

8/3/2021N. Miranda of Richmond County
Please be fair with redistricting county lines.

8/3/2021L. Taylor of Cherokee County
"Hello Sirs and Madams, Please appoint some verified Independents to the redistricting committee. Georgians do not register by parties, therefore, we are all Independents. Please contact me for suggestions of Indies to be appointed to the commission. Thank you, Luanne Taylor"

8/2/2021K. Lawler of Fulton County
"Chairs Kennedy, Rich and Members of the Committees, I am Ken Lawler, Chair of Fair Districts GA and am pleased to have another opportunity to address the committees. We are a non-partisan organization advocating for fair maps. As the public hearings drawing to a close, I want to summarize the input we have all heard. Three major themes emerged. 1. Keep my community together 2. Maps should be fair and non-partisan 3. Protect communities of color and diverse ethnicity The committees have a challenging job to translate this input into fair maps. This will not be easy. Let's now consider where we go from here. How does the process go forward? The other main theme we heard is: Make the process transparent and open to the public. We believe that now is the time for the committees to provide a timeline to the public based on your best estimate of the work. We believe that the committees know enough about the release of data and the work to be done to provide such a timeline. Specific elements of the timeline should include: * Map drawing can begin with the August 16 release of the census data. A Census Bureau post on July 28 writes that the August data are complete but in a legacy format with which states are already familiar. (This reiterates prior guidance.) The bureau believes most states will be able to start redistricting using this data. Our data experts validate this view. The September 30 data release will have additional tools and be easier to use, but contain no new data. * Period of time to draw the maps based on estimates from LCRO and committee staff. We believe that the LCRO staff can reasonably provide such estimates. * Plan a 2nd series of meetings around the state to discuss draft maps. One of the clearest, most common requests we have heard in the hearings is that the public wants to review and comment on the actual maps. * Publish estimated special session dates now, even if they might have to change. The public can understand that some dates might have to change if complications arise. The public has a right to know the timeline, and will trade uncertainty in the dates for visibility. We believe that the committees already have some understanding of a timeline based on Speaker Ralston's recent statements that the special session will be held ""when the frost is on the pumpkin"" (Political Rewind, April 23) and ""around Halloween"" (AJC, July 27). We also believe that a timeline can be produce notwithstanding any pending lawsuits against the Census Bureau about accuracy of the data. We assume that the committees are not going to delay producing maps while lawsuits are pending. We ask that a timeline be made public now. If map drawing begins after August 16, then it is imperative to hold hearings on the guidelines very soon. Guidelines are supposed to govern the mapping work. FDGA and 19 other organizations have provided specific suggestions for these guidelines in our letter dated April 19. The letter was also submitted to the committee as written input. In the interest of transparency, we also ask: * Allow submission of maps by citizens. Citizen groups are already drawing maps. But submission of written testimony today is in plain text only. This is an easy fix: change the Google form to allow attachments, with maps and graphics, in addition to text. * When maps are released, also release your analysis of proposed maps: - Explain all factors used in map preparation - Show how they comply with the Voting Rights Act. Show how many VRA-compliant districts and minority opportunity districts (between 37% and 50% minority population) are created, and show the method used to determine that those are the optimum numbers. - Commit to meeting independent, non-partisan benchmarks for maps, as offered by Fair Districts GA and the Princeton Gerrymandering Project. A detailed report on these benchmarks has been provided to Senator Kennedy on July 29, and a presentation on this was provided at the Athens hearing to both committee chairs on July 6. Fair Districts GA and our partner Princeton Gerrymandering Project are offering our expertise to assist the committees in producing fair maps."

8/2/2021A. Jones of Unknown County

8/2/2021L. Taylor of Cherokee County
"Dear Sirs and Madams, It is important that a few verifiable Independents appear on this committee. Americans are claiming Independent as their voting status in record numbers and must be represented on this committee. Please contact me and I can provide you with the names of individuals that ran for office as Independents, including the collection of signatures to appear on the ballot. Sincerely, Luanne Taylor Independent Candidates in Georgia, USA."

8/1/2021C. Hargrove of Macon-Bibb County
"Macon-Bibb County, with a population of >155,000 is currently drawn into 5 separate State House Districts and 3 Senate Districts. This has the effect of dividing our community and diminishing our strength as a whole when addressing common problems. In addition, these districts extend far into surrounding counties which are mostly rural and have their own agenda and specific needs very different from those of Bibb County. The recent census calls for 59,511 people per Representative district and 191,284 people per Senate district. This computes to three Representatives and two Senators to represent Bibb county. Please draw our district lines with these numbers in mind. My primary concern is the seemingly inevitable process of gerrymandering our districts. As you draw our new districts, please ""show your work"" and publish them well ahead of the vote by the legislature to allow time for public comment. The technology to draw districts that the House and Senate will use is publicly available. So I ask you to be ""nonpartisan"", ""transparent"" and ""fair"". Let there be competitive elections without an incumbent having an assured seat because there's no other candidate for voters to choose. Too many of our elections are over after the primary. This discourages potential candidates from even running for office because districts are drawn for an assured winner. This is the case regardless of which party is drawing the maps. Our democracy is too precious to be run roughshod over this way. Please use benchmarks set by the the Princeton Gerrymandering Project , which will be monitoring Georgia's redistricting recess. Be nonpartisan. Be fair. Be transparent. Give us a working democracy. Thank you. Respectfully, Carolyn Hargrove"

7/31/2021H. Underwood of Muscogee County
"Good evening committee members, my name is Harry Underwood. I'm a resident of Columbus, a resident of Georgia since 1993 and a board member of Better Ballot Georgia, which advocates for instant-runoff voting, also known as ranked-choice voting. I'd like to take this opportunity to tell you how shameful and tiring I find this practice of redistricting by elected legislators, and how we Georgians ought to know better that this political system - of winner-take-all elections, of partisan redistricting by legislators, of restrictive ballot access laws - perpetuate a baked-in culture of constant two-way factional disrespect, drowning out the needs of our state's residents. Other than these United States, no other political system on earth has quite the amount of unilateral temerity shared among so many elected legislators to bake in incumbent advantages for their own (and their friends' own) benefit over the next ten years. The people of this state - no matter what party we may support - should feel upset that our elected legislators won't let themselves compete on competitive grounds nor let themselves be judged by their ideas and goals for legislation across whole communities, not partitioned neighborhoods who are traded between districts because of their partisan lean. We have done this for over 200+ years, with one party having done this for most of this time, and another party which gained power in the early 2000s now doing the same thing. It is time to say ""enough"". The people of this state should demand a better political system than that being exhibited through this committee. Georgia should adopt independent, nonpartisan redistricting by a jury of citizens representative of our state's demographics. Georgia should adopt multi-winner districts and proportional elections systems including ranked-choice voting. Georgia should let those who want less compromise on their political principles register their own political parties with less cost and overhead than is currently, irrationally demanded under state law, so that we could have even more competitive elections. Georgia should adopt rules which count our state's prisoners, who are currently barred from the voting franchise, as residents of their last voluntary residence rather than of their current prison, so that prison-hosting districts are not artificially inflated in their numbers during the redistricting process. And finally, Georgia should join 30 other states, including our neighbors in South Carolina, North Carolina and Tennessee, in adopting a state constitutional amendment requiring all elections in this state to be free, fair and open without civil or military interference. These five reforms could make for more elections which are reflective of our communities and demographic changes without legislators feeling the need to create maps which bake in their own advantages over the course of at least the next five successive legislative elections. These reforms could make for elections in which candidates feel more of a need to seek consideration from all voters, not merely those who ""look"" like they would vote for a certain party. And these reforms could set the guardrails for how our demographics are represented in our General Assembly without pitting our legislators against their constituents. I ask the members of this committee to consider the adoption of nonpartisan redistricting, instant-runoff voting, fairer ballot access laws, a ban on prison gerrymandering, and a free elections amendment to our state constitution. Thank you."

7/31/2021L. Armstrong of Gwinnett County
"I want to live in an area that reflects my conservative values and places priority on public safety, law & order, gun ownership, Liberty of choice, small government, low taxes, national security, schools, education of math & English not teach social justice."

7/31/2021S. Kamal of Unknown County
Let us make it easy to vote

7/30/2021G. Lloyd of Fulton County
Totally against this unfair process!

7/30/2021C. Wilkins of Unknown County

7/30/2021L. Hale of Floyd County
"I am Lucy Johnston Hale, a voter in Georgia's Senate District 52 and Georgia's House District 12. I am a long-term member of the League of Women Voters, which as you know has a 101-year history in our country of nonpartisan work to encourage voting and to educate voters about issues on which they may vote. But I am not speaking for the League of Women Voters, but as a private citizen who has had the privilege of learning about redistricting issues from a number of nonpartisan sources, including the League of Women Voters. My district is one comprised of voters who have divergent opinions and political affiliations. But I was raised to appreciate that our country supports a two-party or historically, at times, a multi-party system. I recognize that the dangers inherent in redistricting, which include the possible dilution of the voting power of politically targeted groups of citizens, especially minorities, cannot be attributed to any one political party here. But as you know, Georgia's redistricting is currently being watched closely by many citizens in our state, and this spotlight is widening and the scrutiny deepening, especially because of our state's lack of laws and regulations that elsewhere can defend against gerrymandering. In Rome and Floyd County, where I grew up and now live, our citizens have earned a good history of working together toward racial harmony and equitable government, that though certainly not perfected has still made sufficient strides against discrimination to protect us from kind of serious conflict that has arisen in some other areas. For example, in 1983 we founded the Martin Luther King Commission here, which was granted both city and county commission sponsorship and has since held an annual week-long, widely-attended program, celebrating the democratic ideals for which Martin Luther King Jr. was awarded the Nobel Prize. Our current city police chief is a well-respected African-American woman. Most of our large churches, many of our smaller churches, and many of our non-profits, along with a large number of private citizens, have formed a diverse membership in One Community United, an initiative to encourage fellowship among all citizens here, regardless of their demographic differences. Still, I am not naive enough to believe that this worked-for harmony is not fragile. I am testifying today largely from one motive: my fear that any redistricting in Georgia that can be plausibly accused of being designed to skew elections toward electing aa single party's candidates at the expense of the minority vote could trigger serious distrust and anger from many sectors in our community reversing the progress we have accomplished. I understand that fair redistricting is complicated, but there are now tools that with technological and academic expertise can make the task less daunting. I ask for transparency in our legislature's redistricting process as a vital part of assuring all our citizens that their votes are not being diluted or discarded for partisan advantage. To establish credible evidence that the Georgia legislature did not base its mapmaking protocol on the goal of achieving partisan advantage, I ask legislators to consult with nationally respected, nonpartisan expert resources on redistricting, including the Princeton Gerrymandering Project. I also ask that the legislature document the redistricting guidance they receive from these resources, and note which recommendations from these resources they followed and which they rejected. Securing this guidance would be a convincing element of transparency and help defuse the dangerous perception of deliberate disenfranchisement of diverse groups by our legislature. To use only in-house and partisan guidance to draw district maps will be sure to signal that the Georgia redistricting process was at best hidebound and careless about the minority vote, and at worst an undemocratic scheme. The archive documenting how Georgia used nonpartisan expert guidance should be presented to the public before our district maps are final. Without such evidence of a good-faith redistricting process, I fear that any resulting disenfranchisement of minority groups could result in newly incendiary social turmoil in our state. I urge our legislators to take this potential consequence seriously. Thank you. I appreciate the opportunity to submit an archived written testimony about Georgia redistricting, and also the opportunities you have given for in-person testimony. Sincerely, Lucy Johnston Hale Box 370 Cave Spring, GA 30124"

7/30/2021K. Stewart of Cobb County
"Greetings to the Committee. I am a proud former resident of beautiful and historic Cascade in Southwest Atlanta and a current resident of Cobb County. I love the South and I want to believe in the best for the State of Georgia. However, when I see that in-person Redistricting Town Halls were held in Brunswick, Albany, Columbus, and Macon but not in the State Capitol of Atlanta I cannot do that. Despite the outward kindness of my neighbors, I cannot ignore this disrespect and I cannot deny that it does appear to reflect racism and that it hurts. Atlanta is the economic engine and cultural center for this entire state. We are the Capitol and we always will be. It is unethical to drain our resources and labor without fair and equitable consideration in all matters. It is problematic that despite the fact that Georgia is estimated to be only 52% white and less than 50% males, the Redistricting Committee is dominated by white men. Additionally, when the Committee engages in unfair practices they subject Atlanta and the entire state to the threat of economic boycotts. Surely the Committee has not forgotten the $100 million loss the state suffered when the MLB All-Star Game was relocated to Denver. Regardless of any of your personal hurt feelings or politics, this type of economic damage hurts the entire region at a time when the tourism and hospitality industries desperately need to regain their footing. Continuing to behave in this manner reflects a deficit not only in moral leadership but also fiscal intelligence. Thank you for your time."

7/30/2021O. Baker of Fulton County
"I AM PRESENTING MY PUBLIC COMMENT HERE BECAUSE, WHILE MY COMMENTS WAS LESS THAN 3 MINUTES, I WAS RUSHED TO END MY STATEMENT. MY FULL STATEMENT IS PRESENTED HERE. Public Comments to the Joint Town Hall of the House Legislative & Congressional Reapportionment Committee and the Senate Reapportionment and Redistricting Committee Good evening, Members of the Georgia House and Senate Reapportionment and Redistricting Committee; My name is Opal Baker. I reside in East Point, Georgia and I am a volunteer with the Georgia Peanut Gallery and Fair Fight Action. There is no question that Georgia's population has swelled significantly over the last decade. This is well documented by the Georgia Department of Economic Development and in local and national media, such as the Atlanta-Journal Constitution and the Associated Press. US Census data released in April of this year, bears out Georgia's population growth, as well. As a 2020 census worker knocking on doors in my neighborhood and in the areas surrounding East Point in the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic, I literally came face-to-face with the extra-long lists of households provided by the Census daily. As you already know, according to the US Census, our population in Georgia has grown by over 1.7 million people. That's a lot of new doors to knock and it signals a bright future for Georgia! Still, my concern about past behaviors by our local governments spills into my concern for the potential harm to our future. Given the historical issues with gerrymandering and the jockeying for power in the Georgia legislature, not to mention the current climate of hyper-partisan division, I am concerned about the impact your redistricting process will have on my community and communities like mine. It is clear that Republicans currently have the advantage in Georgia, as both the State House and Senate are GOP-controlled. The passing and signing into law of SB 202 does very little to assuage my concern about the motivations of the leadership in our Georgia Legislature, as that law seriously infringes on my access to the ballot box. I have 3 major concerns about how your body will address the redistricting process. My first concern is about a potential lack of bi-partisanship. If the process of ramming SB202 through to law is any indication of the mind-set of the body that will be responsible for such an important and transformative task as redistricting, I am not hopeful that the outcome will be reflective of the needs of my community. When government leadership is not reflective of the people being served, we, the People, are the ones who will be most negatively impacted by your actions. It is imperative that your decision-making process include an equitable number of non-GOP representatives whose voices will be heard throughout the redistricting process. Second, how will you guarantee that neighborhoods are not split up? What is your plan for ensuring community involvement WHILE the lines are being drawn? Who has been invited to sit at the table to represent and describe our neighborhoods and our cities? Whose voices will you listen to when you are dividing up our state? It is imperative that the process of creating districts keep communities of like interest and needs together while ensuring that the historical practice of using ""cracking"" and ""packing"" tactics is abolished. Maps must be equitable and representative and communities must have a say in how their neighborhood lines are drawn to ensure that they/WE have a fair chance of electing the candidates of our choice. Finally, it is my expectation that full Transparency will be the order of the day during the redistricting process. Unlike the aggressive and surreptitious SB202, this process must not happen behind closed doors. Since we all cannot be in the room with you, the public deserves a view of this process through frequent updates and representation by the organizations that represent us. In this way, oversight is broad, varied and relevant. The redistricting committee must meet this moment by ensuring that it is working for the People. This requires your commitment to transparency in this mapping process. It requires that you effectively and meaningfully solicit community members, organizations and coalitions for input on the interests and needs of the people who live in them and know them the best. And, it requires rising to your better angels and working through this process in the interest of Georgians, setting aside party allegiances that impede the rights of the people to elect the representatives of their choice. Please, reach out to grassroots organizations and coalitions for input on who should be in this process with you. Make sure that everybody's voice is being heard and that our concerns are taken into consideration throughout the redistricting process. At the very least, you MUST adhere to the requirements of the 1965 Voting Rights Act and its subsequent amendments. Thank you."

7/30/2021M. Spamer of Gwinnett County

7/30/2021K. Naeem of Fulton County

7/30/2021C. Petsch of Fulton County
"I feel gratified by the diversity around me in the city of Atlanta. I do not want to be isolated into a voting block by age, income, race or religion. I want to be gathered into a section with my fellow Georgians based on a consolidated region - an area of equal population with other sections rather than neighborhoods tacked together by specious demographics."

7/30/2021L. Edenfield of Glynn County
Why is it necessary to divide counties? Shouldn't all of one county be in the same district? (Clark is just one example)

7/30/2021E. Duke of Fulton County

7/30/2021M. Allen of Pickens County
"We do not have a democracy as long as the prevailing party gets the perk of drawing districts to their advantage, effectively cancelling opposing votes."

7/30/2021J. MacArthur of Unknown County

7/30/2021C. Hargrove of Macon-Bibb County
"Macon-Bibb County, with a population of >155,000 is currently drawn into 5 separate State House Districts and 3 Senate Districts. This has the effect of dividing our community and diminishing our strength as a whole when addressing common problems. In addition, these districts extend far into surrounding counties which are mostly rural and have their own agenda and specific needs very different from those of Bibb County. The recent census calls for 59,511 people per Representative district and 191,284 people per Senate district. This computes to three Representatives and two Senators to represent Bibb county. Please draw our district lines with these numbers in mind. My primary concern is the seemingly inevitable process of gerrymandering our districts. As you draw our new districts, please ""show your work"" and publish them well ahead of the vote by the legislature to allow time for public comment. The technology to draw districts that the House and Senate will use is publicly available. So I ask you to be ""nonpartisan"", ""transparent"" and ""fair"". Let there be competitive elections without an incumbent having an assured seat because there's no other candidate for voters to choose. Too many of our elections are over after the primary. This discourages potential candidates from even running for office because districts are drawn for an assured winner. This is the case regardless of which party is drawing the maps. Our democracy is too precious to be run roughshod over this way. Please use benchmarks set by the the Princeton Gerrymandering Project , which will be monitoring Georgia's redistricting recess. Be nonpartisan. Be fair. Be transparent. Give us a working democracy. Thank you. Respectfully, Carolyn Hargrove"

7/30/2021C. Fiaschi of Unknown County

7/30/2021P. Scarpucci of Fulton County
"Other states have used independent, non-partisan boards to define electoral districts using appropriate demographics and modeling--not partisan legislatures--to assure equity and fairness. Georgia should follow the example and become a model for other Southern states. I'm a native Georgian whose family has been here since 1725; I care about the state's reputation and I vote!"

7/30/2021M. Lightner of Towns County

7/30/2021K. Naeem of Fulton County

7/30/2021E. Paulk of Fulton County
"My name is Eric Paulk and I am the deputy director of Georgia Equality. I come before the commission to join others in urging this year's redistricting process to be open and transparent. I would also ask that the public be given further opportunity to provide feedback on the proposed district lines once they have been drawn and before they have been approved. Finally, I urge the members of the legislature to remember that Georgia's strength lies in its diversity. As such, it is imperative that this process includes input from people of all backgrounds if we are to achieve the commission's stated goal of fairness. While final information on my community has not yet been released from the US Census Bureau, based upon information provided through the American Community Survey, we know that there are some 450,000 people in Georgia who identify as gay, lesbian, bisexual or transgender. Furthermore, we know that at least a quarter of these folks are raising children throughout the state. Our community is not limited to one area of the state or to only the urban centers. We are truly representative of the state as a whole. We are men and women who pay our taxes; support local businesses and struggle to get by just like anyone else. We raise children and take care of our parents. We represent all races, religions and economic groups. We are part of the fabric of society, whether you acknowledge us or not. Our interest in this process is just as valid as any other group. Like so many others who have given public comment, Georgia's LGBT community has suffered due to a lack of adequate representation. We have no laws that protect us from losing our jobs or being forced out of our homes. This is what happens when there is not adequate representation in the legislative process. I do believe in the promise of fairness and equality but without adequate representation, I wonder how long before I can fully enjoy it."

7/30/2021T. Swann of Cobb County
Redistricting needs to be a non-partisan process and not subject to the whim of whichever party happens to be in power. Furthermore it should be objective and subject to minimal human intervention.

7/30/2021R. Halley of Baldwin County
I believe in democracy. Trying to produce districts that presuppose who will win is unethical

7/30/2021L. Woodworth of Morgan County
"I am extremely concerned about this rushed redistricting discussion happening before census data is released. What I am seeing (a life long Georgia resident) is increasing encroachment on my voting rights. You don't get to cherry pick your voters, your voters choose YOU."

7/30/2021R. Berry of Fulton County
"Drawing districts has been inherently undemocratic since the Redlining of the 1950s and 60s. The Republican party is actively making undemocratic choices in order to hold onto their power, as they see the inevitable shift in voting patterns due to population and social changes. Rather than good governing, Republicans have chosen to break the system. This is *wrong*, and could mean the death of the United States. The fact that they can install an election certifier of their choice if they don't like the results of an eelection, is wrong. They idolize a man who does not deserve it, and are upending democracy, flipping over the board game, because they don't get to be in first anymore. These past five years have been some of the most disgraceful in American history, and still a man who has grifted millions still has raucous support. Like destroy-the-country-and-any-who-don't-go-along-support. Make no mistake: if you make it harder to vote, easier to turn over elections, and follow a madman no matter what, you are a traitor to the United States."

7/30/2021B. Hill of Houston County
Disgracefull

7/30/2021P. of DeKalb County
"Good afternoon my name is Peyton Lockwood I have been a longtime resident and was raised in HD 79 and state senate district 40. I am a current board member with the Dekalb Young Republicans. I am also an active member of Americans for prosperity. I believe we do not have a fair representation of bipartisan power within the district or in Dekalb. Instead, we have partisan democrat legislators and politicians that aren't from our district. These delegates have voted to gerrymander and redraw my district so they could give themselves more power. Vote and increase partisan proposals. Also, act as electors to pick representatives and make decisions that don't better serve our communities. They want to put their own values and concerns over the people they represent. We've even had some legislators from my county say that ""it is a fair chance for everyone"". While it that may only seem fair to the current delegation. When it has not been for conservatives that don't have their own party and values represented within this delegation. Instead of the democrats playing partisan politics, it is important that we have a fair and reasonable distribution of power so that the citizens and republicans of Dekalb can work together to problem-solve local-related issues. Over the last few years, the people and constituents of my district have not had their voices heard. This is undemocratic and suppresses the right for the people to vote and choose their own candidates. It also does not give the people the power to participate or make recommendations to legislators groups and data studies on re-districting. This has been an ongoing issue in Dekalb County for many years. We feel very marginalized and ignored by our current legislators who don't understand my end of the district very well."

7/30/2021G. Muhammad of Macon-Bibb County
"Peace and blessings Honorable Legislators and Elected Leaders of Georgia: I hope that you will allow the results of the 2020 Census to accurately and fairly guide your updating of district lines. The suffocating contention and extreme polarization between Republicans and Democrats is an overwhelmingly destructive force in our nation, state and cities. Sadly, the temptation and indeed the plan may be gaining power for power's sake by whichever party has the upper hand by numbers, votes, and ultimately control of redrawing district lines. In Georgia our last gubernatorial election, which was exceedingly close and controversial with extraordinary dubiousness because of a glaring conflict of interest posture. As you know, extensive voting system reform efforts were undertaken and Georgia in 2020 had a tremendous voter turnout in spite of the Pandemic which was in truth handled very well by election processors across the state. Yet there has risen in the wake of the 2020 Presidential election in our state, a sweeping disregard for the wounds and undermining of voter confidence during our last Georgia gubernatorial election. Then, in the face of subsequent success with the enacted changes, bi-partisan reforms, adjustments, and a significant demonstration to Georgia voters of an effort to be fair, a new bill was suddenly passed restricting voter access. The bitterness that rages between Republicans and Democrats; an inordinate battle for the upper hand, I am concerned will result in unreasonable, inaccurate and unfair redrawing of district lines. This of course, is not new, but the spirit of contention is so great in America and Georgia today. Therefore it needs to be reminded and sternly emphasized; that when elected officials misrepresent the people, all the people of the community; they commit injustice against the people. Being unfaithful to the people's trust as an elected official in accurate, reasonable and sincere reconciliation of redistricting to the parameters of the current decennial Census means that that official or those officials in collaboration are no longer honorable, but have compromised their honor and character for a corrupted agenda. It robs and brings tremendous damage to our Georgia communities most in need of investment and support. May you all be blessed to guard against and avoid such pitfalls."

7/29/2021P. Lockwood of DeKalb County

7/29/2021C. Maddux of Fulton County
"I urge our legislators to draw districts that ONLY reflect numbers, community, and racial equity. A legislator's ability to retain their position should be dependent on how well they serve their constituents NOT on political machinations that result in divided neighborhoods like mine in Roswell."

7/29/2021T. Cantwell of Monroe County
"We should have a non-partisan commission to establish reasonable districts. Fairness should essential. Short of that, gross gerrymandering should be prohibited."

7/29/2021V. WATKINS of Unknown County
"For Redistricting Sub-Committee: As a long time elected official representing the urban core of Macon-Bibb I wanted to notate the instances of gerrymandering that exist within our counties commission districts. The format of my district from a mapping stand point is an unnatural snake-like figure that splits many historic neighborhoods and census tracts in ways that make advocacy and accountability far more difficult to attain for many citizens, as well as many other well documented consequences of gerrymandering. Furthermore in the county of Bibb the neighborhoods and tracts that are split in this way are almost exclusively black, have high concentrations of poverty, and have been identified as federal opportunity zones. In one of the most egregious local examples we discovered a contiguous garden style apartment complex where the rear of the complex was a different commission district from the front. Another interesting point is that there are a few voting precincts that serve multiple commission districts leading to confusion each election cycle. Figure 1. Shows the boundaries of the Pleasant Hill Community overlaying Commission Districts 5 & 8. Figure 2. Shows the Napier Heights, Unionville, and Anthony Terrace Communities all being bisected with parts belonging to Commission Districts 5&8. Figure 3. Shows the Bloomfield community having representatives from three separate commission districts. Figure4. Shows the Downtown and Intown communities being split between three commission districts. Figure 5. Shows South Macon's Houston Avenue Area dividing the business district using the center line and weaving in a way that divides the neighborhood in an unpredictable way."

7/29/2021J. Hall of Toombs County
"I am a nine-year resident of Lyons, Georgia, in the 156 districts of Georgia. This district is close-knit, and although county and city lines are known, the district comes together to leverage its voice. Our area has grown drastically since the last Census, both in number and diverseness. I have a few concerns regarding the upcoming re-redistricting. (Census) - I was privileged to be part of the new census process. I was concerned with the number of questions asked in the Census and how difficult it was to gather all the information required. Many of the questions were un-needed and caused apprehension. In our rural area, migrant families are prevalent and hard to count. Adding these questions caused this task to be even more difficult. The Census should reflect the number of resources needed to adequately meet the needs of the citizens. Further town hall meetings have taken place before census data being released. This prohibits those represented from having adequate information to speak intelligently regarding that data in the public meetings. Lastly, as stated above, although we know the growth in our community locally, we are unaware as to whether or not the Census reflects that growth. (Condensed time frame) Due to the late Census, I am concerned that the committee is being rushed to redistrict the state. This pressure may force the committee to make bad or detrimental decisions in order to meet the deadline. The maps will have a 10-year effect on our community. This effect, if detrimental or entered into without fairness, could paralyze our community."

7/29/2021D. Taylor of Houston County
"Good evening, Georgia Legislative and Congressional Reapportionment Committee, My name is Debbie Taylor, a PhD(c) scholar in Psychology and a Candidate for Centerville Georgia, I'm here today on behalf of the constituents to seek truth, trust, and transparency in the process of redistricting and its impact on the community. Second, to seek fair and equal accountability of the census dataset because Georgia has a history of Gerrymandering. As we go through the pandemic which has significantly impacted the census process it is expected that the results of resident participation would be skewed. How do you intend to protect the mapping of our communities to be a fair representation of the evolving population demographics and the reapportionment of legislators to the community that would be favorable to remapping the district lines. Minorities and people living at or below the poverty line are not reflected in the discourse and the current district lines favor the more socially and economically advantaged.The promise of government is that each person is adequately represented, regardless of ethnicity, gender, religion, or socioeconomics of the people that embody it. I ask that you keep in mind that each person, each community differs, be the legislative-dominant power that represents the people. On behalf of the many communities statewide, I implore you to take into account the COVID-19 effects on the 2020 Census Data, be mindful of the Outliers in the Data, and the transitional migration of people during the pandemic when interpreting the data. Respectfully submitted, Debbie Taylor PhD(c) of Psychology"

7/29/2021P. Cantwell of Unknown County
"I am tired of the partisan politics causing strife in our state and in our nation. I used to identify as a Republican, but that party has strayed so far from the truth that I no longer do. I am not a Democrat either. I believe that all citizens have the right to vote and should be able to vote freely and easily. I also believe that all citizens, no matter how different from me, should have representation. I do not know the ""right"" way to set up voting districts. I hope, you, the people in charge, have sought out counsel, ideas, new possibilities, to aid you in this process. Have you asked other states about their processes? What works and what doesn't? We should all work together to do what is best for our state."

7/28/2021C. Cheney of Macon-Bibb County
"My preference for redistricting is for the state legislation to hire an independent redistricting contractor. Georgia needs new districts, but ones created with transparency. The citizens of Georgia have a right to see and provide reasonable input to the final maps that will affect our ways of life. The elected state legislators have an obligation to consider and listen to all of us and take actions in reasonable, not political ways. We need transparency, not ""slight of hand"" and secrecy from political parties. Georgia voters deserve to know what their elected officials are doing and the opportunity to recommend changes before these elected officials make the final decision. We need districts where we have quality candidates from different political parties and they actually have a chance to win: not some ""fixed"" race like we have in many areas now. Many of Georgia's voters are tired of checking the only box available and want to have real choices among qualified candidates, not just a political party. I challenge the state legislators to step up and create a redistricting map that is good for all Georgians. Hopefully, the 2020 redistricting map won't be the obvious gerrymandering embarrassment that we got in 2010...or worse."

7/28/2021D. Johnson of Oconee County
"Free and fair elections are the cornerstone of our democracy. Political districts designed to insure the outcome of an election for either party are in direct conflict with the very idea of free and fair elections. Such uncompetitive districts attract candidates that appeal to the extreme wing of their party who are more interested in partisanship than good governance. Rather than focusing on partisan party politics, we must embrace the concept of competitive general elections which will attract candidates from both parties who are interested in serving all the constituents of their district. Our state, our nation and our very society are at a critical crossroads. I ask the Joint Reapportionment Committee to strive to create fair and competitive political districts that will justly represent all Georgians. Thank you for your consideration and for this opportunity to comment."

7/28/2021M. Perry of Barrow County
"My submitted comment: When Georgia's political districts are engineered to be safe for either party, everyone loses. Without competitive general elections, only the primary matters. Georgians end up with representatives who are only interested in their district's activist base. Across Georgia, the quality of our Congressional delegation has declined as we've seen a proliferation of unqualified party loyalists who have little time for district issues. They're too busy seeking a national spotlight. I ask the Joint Reapportionment Committee to restore competitive general elections, in which qualified candidates must appeal to, and actually work for, all of a district's voters - not just those who vote in a party primary. This is healthy for both parties, for democracy, and for Georgia. Thank you for your consideration and for this opportunity to comment."

7/28/2021L. Thomas Jr. of Oconee County
"When Georgia's political districts are engineered to be safe for either party, everyone loses. Without competitive general elections, only the primary matters. Georgians end up with representatives who are only interested in their district's activist base. Across Georgia, the quality of our Congressional delegation has declined as we've seen a proliferation of unqualified party loyalists who have little time for district issues. They're too busy seeking a national spotlight. I ask the Joint Reapportionment Committee to restore competitive general elections, in which qualified candidates must appeal to, and actually work for, all of a district's voters - not just those who vote in a party primary. This is healthy for both parties, for democracy, and for Georgia. Thank you for your consideration and for this opportunity to comment."

7/28/2021T. Cook of Fulton County
"Gerrymandering is one of the most un-democratic characteristics of our government today. In almost every state, Democrat or Republican led, we see our elected officials manipulating who votes for them to ensure their positions. We have the opportunity to establish a process for redistricting that is honest to the people of Georgia. I implore the members of Georgia's house to create new maps transparently, using open sourced software, which can be proven to satisfy metrics for un-biased representation for all of Georgia's voters. Thank you."

7/28/2021K. McCown of Unknown County
"As of July 28, 2021, I have attended three of the joint House and Senate redistricting committee hearings. A common theme in the testimony from participants is the desire to keep communities within the same state House, state Senate, or Congressional district whenever possible. I recognize that this is sometimes not possible because community population exceeds the maximum size of the district. However, it appears that communities are often unnecessarily fragmented among multiple districts in odd configurations, denying residents a unified voice in their representation. I live in the portion of the DeKalb County Druid Hills neighborhood that is included in House District 83, which is approximately 1 mile wide and 16 - 17 miles long, stretching from north of Lavista Road south to the county line. This ""bacon strip"" district spans six cities and nine zip codes, including multiple communities of interest with different needs. The neighboring district, HD 84, is similarly configured. My understanding is that guidelines adopted by the House and Senate redistricting committees include district compactness. Please apply these guidelines whenever possible to the new electoral district maps."

7/28/2021K. McCown of Unknown County
"I appreciate the commitment of the joint House and Senate redistricting committee to a transparent redistricting process. As a part of that commitment, we are asking the General Assembly to eliminate the secrecy surrounding redistricting and for legislators and their staff to conduct their work in full view of the public. This includes the full, timely disclosure of all data, algorithms, maps, and mapping shape files in time for public review and comment, well in advance of legislative votes. These principles should not be difficult to adopt. Legislators owe the voters of Georgia a fair redistricting process and resulting maps. Thank you."

7/28/2021L. Benecchi of Cobb County
"My name is Liz Benecchi, and I am a member of IGNITE, a national nonprofit organization that empowers young women to run for office. I live in Marietta, and I am a resident of the 6th Congressional District, the 45th State House District, and the 32nd State Senate District of Georgia. I find it truly bizarre that the state of Georgia has two democratic United States Senators and went blue in the last presidential election for Joe Biden, but our State House and State Senate are both overwhelmingly red-a roughly 61% majority in the State Senate and 56% majority in the State House. This does not add up. This does not reflect the views of the people of Georgia, but rather, shows us the direct effects of partisan politics and gerrymandering. The Legislative and Congressional Reapportionment Committee of Georgia is made up of our state elected officials. Thirteen Republican members and only five Democrats. How do we not expect to get skewed, unfair, and partisan districts from this? We are giving those who are already in power the chance to rig the game, to ensure their next win. We've seen this before, it's so important for Georgians to voice our opposition to this inequitable and unrepresentative process, because if we don't, our officials will overstep democracy for power in the blink of an eye. If partisanship and greed infiltrate our system, our communities receive tainted representation. I saw this first-hand working as an aide at the State Capitol this past legislative session. No community deserves to be fractured, and no community deserves to endure any political, racial, or economic disadvantages due to unfair, unjust, and unrepresentative redistricting. If we want our districts to be cut fairly, we must have an independent nonpartisan redistricting commission made up of Georgia citizens who do not have any ulterior motives, except to ensure the voices of other Georgians are heard. Gerrymandering is a form of voter suppression, and when our elected officials silence our voices, both our individual and community power gets stolen right from under us. You, as elected officials, have an obligation to do what's right for Georgia. So I beg of you, please consider giving Georgians this crucial seat the table to allow for transparency and accountability during the 2021 redistricting process. Thank you for your time."

7/28/2021T. Stevens of Newton County
Serving along with like minds.

7/28/2021J. Reynolds of Hall County
"I work at Chicopee Woods Elementary in Hall County. My son, Jared, is very patriotic. Loves his country. Planning to join the military when he graduates. He would love the opportunity to serve at the Capitol for a day!"

7/28/2021C. Burnham of Gwinnett County
"When we moved to Suwanee 4 yrs ago we went to Suwanee town center Memorial day. There were families picnicking, sitting on blankets, children playing. In the neighborhoods there were American flags displayed. Please keep this a district where families, patriotism and conservative values are respected. Thank you."

7/27/2021D. Boyer of Macon-Bibb County
https://m.facebook.com/story.php?story_fbid=10226548068668992&id=1264242581

"7/27/2021R. WILLIAMS, JR. of Richmond County"
"THE PEOPLE OF RICHMOND COUNTY ASK THAT YOU BE FAIR AND EQUITABLE IN ALL YOUR DECISIONS CONCERNING REDISTRICTING. PLEASE UNDERSTAND THE NEED TO HAVE OUR COMMUNITY PAIRED WITH COMMUNITIES OF INTEREST/LIKENESS ESPECIALLY WHEN IT COMES TO OUR U.S. LEGISLATIVE REPRESENTATION. THE CURRENT STATUS GIVES THE PEOPLE OF RICHMOND COUNTY THE LEAST ABILITY TO ELECT A U.S. REPRESENTATIVE THAT WOULD HAVE THE PEOPLE OF RICHMOND COUNTY INTEREST, BEING THAT RICHMOND COUNTY IS MORE POPULATED, URBANIZED/SUBURBANIZED THEN THE EXSISTING RURAL COUNTIES THAT IT IS CURRENTLY MATCHED WITH. GIVE THE PEOPLE OF RICHMOND COUNTY THE ABILITY THROUGH THE REDISTRICTING PROCESS THE OPPOURTUNITY TO HAVE A VOICE IN THE ISSUES THAT EFFECTS THEM. THANK YOU FOR YOUR CONSIDERATION(S)"

7/27/2021J. Robinson of Dougherty County
Dougherty County needs all three of its state representatives and no changes to other seats.

7/27/2021J. Robinson III of Dougherty County
Dougherty County needs all three of its state representatives and no changes to other elected seats.

7/27/2021R. Rambeau of Dougherty County
Dougherty County needs all three of its state representatives and no changes to other official seats

7/27/2021J. Sneed of Dougherty County
Dougherty County needs all three of its state representatives and no changes to other seats.

7/27/2021L. Sneed of Dougherty County
Dougherty County needs all three of its state representatives and no changes to other seats.

7/27/2021M. Wiley of Macon-Bibb County
"Redistricting should be a nonpartisan, transparent process that is not used as a tool to keep one party in power. It's hard for Macon-Bibb to operate as one community when we are divided into five different House and three Senate districts."

7/27/2021M. Saunders of Carroll County
"Good evening, and thank you for allowing me to speak. My name is Martha Saunders and I am here with 2 other women from Carroll County. We share several concerns about the redistricting process. Like many others, we are concerned about how the process will work. Will we, as citizens, be made aware of the rules and guidelines that will determine the outcomes? Will we be able to see drafts of maps as soon as they are drawn and be able to publicly react to the drafts? We are especially interested in how the districts for the Georgia House seats are drawn. Carroll County is currently represented by 4 different House representatives, only one of whom calls Carroll County home, and he also represents part of another county. So there is no House legislator whose sole responsibility is our county's welfare and interests. Compactness and the preservation of existing political communities are two of the criteria for drawing legislative districts. We ask that the Joint Apportionment and Redistricting Committee make the system transparent and allow all citizens to see and react to all the district maps that involve their counties-Congressional, State Senate, State House, and those within the county. We appreciate your taking time to hear our concerns. We know that you have a difficult task ahead of you."

7/27/2021S. Smith of Chatham County
"I have been laid off by my job on 3/24, my employer Broadpath llc has put the request in, i was told when a employer puts it in it will process quicker, some things were checked incorrectly amd my employer resubmitted corrections also spoke w a nakietha at our local office faxed documents, its now going on August no payment, no lights, water and a eviction again. I have called every number the local says leave a message the office is closed to the public, sent emails and voicemails no one calls back, i need help please called the Atlanta claims it states no one is avail to take your call and disconnects, how can pepple live or find a job like this, its so unacceptable and disbelief to this system, this was the next step, i semt a message to congress as well not sure where to go next"

7/27/2021J. Chubb of McIntosh County
"I have lived in Glynn and McIntosh counties for over 40 years and would like to see the redistricting of McIntosh county to stay as much the same as possible. Also, to be transparent, it seems the public should have a chance for public comment after the new lines are drawn. Thank you"

7/27/2021R. Stift of Cobb County
"Seeking information as to why the State of Georgia has ignored an unsurmountable number of Unemployment claims, including mine! The results on negligence has made myself as well as others HOMELESS!!!! I need your help!"

7/27/2021W. Staskiewicz of Gwinnett County
"My comments are on the potential redistricting of the 7th. I moved here from Pittsburgh and have seen the harm of majority Democrat districts. We voted in the Georgia House and Senate majorities to be Republican and any redistricting should be done to strengthen the Republican voters and policies. We here in North Gwinnett (Suwanee, Sugar Hill, Dacula, Buford) would like a wholly conservative district. We want Republican representation that reflects our conservative values. We do not want to be joined up with a Democratic district whose values are not in alignment with ours."

7/27/2021C. Wells of Gwinnett County
"As a life long voter since I was 18, my choices on where I live and where I locate my private business are impacted by being in a Republican district for living and working. We here in North Gwinnett (Suwanee, Sugar Hill, Dacula, Buford) would like a wholly conservative district. We want Republican representation that reflects our conservative values. We do not want to be joined up with a Democratic district whose values are not in alignment with ours. I am asking that if 7th voting and values stay staunchly Republican if we are affected by the redistricting. With Republicans having the Ga House and Senate majority, we ask that we strengthen the party values of our districts and not weaken them."

7/27/2021T. SODER of Chatham County
I would love to see/stand behind delegating the Redistricting process to a computer program that uses a nonpartisan and politically hands-off model to generate maps based on Census data.

7/27/2021L. Lockey of Ware County
"Why do Ware County have Three House Representative, 174, 176 & 180. Can this be change back to the Original. Please Consider this Change for the Citizens of Ware County. Thank You Very Much!!!!"

7/27/2021H. Hall of Ware County
Please make the process fair without gerrymandering! Keep politics out of redistribution by Including nonpartisan participation in process.

7/26/2021M. Schmelz of Henry County
Historically this has been a problem

7/26/2021A. Chubb of McIntosh County
I was ill and unable to attend. We have larger population in mcintosh and glynn cty. We need more representation in congress

7/26/2021H. Davis of Gwinnett County
"My family with four registered voters in our home wish to remain in a conservative, Republican jurisdiction that shares our values for low crime, support of police, personal liberty, protection of constitutional rights to free speech and religion, maintenance of a democratic country (not socialist), and other similar conservative values."

7/26/2021F. Pescatore of Unknown County
"Having moved to Suwanee 5 years ago from Ohio, I saw that Suwanee was an area where I most felt at home. I come from the mid-west, with conservative mid-west values. I value low crime, good schools, beautiful parks. I like neighbors who feel the same way I do, and vote Republican. Many of my friends have lived here a lot longer than me and are extremely concerned with the downgrade of the schools and the rise in crime here. We do not want Democratic representation. We want a Republican Congressman who will represent our conservative values. Please consider North Gwinnett when redrawing the maps and align us or keep us in conservative territory! Thank you!"

7/26/2021S. Doonan of Macon-Bibb County
"I would like to see a redistricting process that mmets the following fair and logical criteria : * Transparent! with input from citizens-not hidden away in secret rooms * Allows citizens to choose their elected officials, rather than elected officials choosing their voters * Doesn't subdivide large communities (like Macon-Bibb County) * Doesn't allow the party in power in the legislature to create a monopoly, which is undemocratic and un-American! * Has independent, non-partisan oversight"

7/26/2021R. Kelly of Athens-Clarke County
"I would like to see the redistricting process be independent, transparent, and fair. Redistricting is meant to ensure that communities have fair and accurate representation and I do not believe that can happen when Georgia legislators are involved in the process themselves; it creates a conflict of interest. My own community (Clarke county) is sliced and diced and currently represented by individuals that don't live in the county and thus have no personal interest in the needs of our citizens. The state of Georgia should give the responsibility of redistricting to independent special commissions and/or change the process to reduce and eliminate partisan gerrymandering. The current system reduces competition in elections and the power of our vote as a community."

7/26/2021A. Burroughs of Madison County
"I know you do not care to receive input that does not support your predetermined decisions, but I have always considered that redistricting should be done by a nonpartisan committee and that elected officials should have several years residency in the district in which they serve."

7/26/2021H. Jardine of Unknown County
"Redistricting is a nonpartisan effort. It should be a process that is transparent and with citizen input. Elected officials should not be choosing their voters; voters should be electing their officials. With Macon-Bibb's being broken into five House and three Senate districts, it is very difficult to have any legislative influence or to qualify for funds that might be available. I encourage the committee to utilize data-based information for map drawing, not political expediency. Thank you for your attention."

7/26/2021S. Smith of Macon-Bibb County
"The people of Georgia have every right to expect that the redistricting process is fair and non-partisan. The Georgia redistricting process has been played out behind the scenes, allowing for legislators to pick their own voters to remain in power. Many, if not most, legislators get complacent and no longer feel the need to listen to voters or hold town halls. We want maps based on community input, logical geographic boundaries, and independent non-partisan oversight, not politics. We are watching."

7/26/2021G. Ragsdale of Glynn County
"This is an opportunity to create a House district that includes all of St. Simons Island, Sea Island and Jekyll Island, rather than having this geography divided between two districts as is the current case. Having two Representatives for St. Simons is often confusing for residents. Having a single Representative, just as we have a single Senator, will be much more efficient and effective representation."

7/25/2021D. Thomas of Unknown County

7/25/2021A. Russell of Muscogee County
"we would like all of Muscogee to be in one district. it would be my idea for Muscogee, Harris, and Meriweather to all 3 move to the 2dd Congressional District. thank you for this meeting."

7/25/2021J. Le of Unknown County

7/25/2021P. Lockwood of DeKalb County

7/25/2021V. Greene of Glynn County
"When will you stop trying to control elections and let the voters control the elections. It's about time you stopped redistricting to pick your voters and skew the results. No longer will people be fooled by crooked lines, districts starting and stopping for no reason and other shenanigans. We are a more educated voter population. If you can't win fairly, you don't deserve to win. Hopefully, one day, we will bypass your need for power."

7/25/2021M. Koplin of Macon-Bibb County
"Redistricting is a nonpartisan effort and should be a transparent process. We ought to have maps based on community input, logical geographic boundaries and independent non-partisan oversight, not politics. It is only in this way that Georgia's citizens will be able to choose representatives who will have their best interests in mind. Fair representation is good for all Georgians."

7/23/2021C. Denton of Cobb County
Please make sure redistricting has nothing to do with racial or socio economic disadvantage for some people. This state needs to get away from any and all versions of discrimination.

7/22/2021R. Rose of Fulton County

7/21/2021D. Kane of Athens-Clarke County
"Athens is the smallest county in Georgia yet divided up into 3 State house districts, 2 State Senate, and 2 Congressional districts, diluting the communities ability to be heard and represented. The redistricting process should be non-partisan, involve an oversight board comprised of community members, be more transparent, and provide more accountability. I don't want our districts gerrymandered by the Republicans OR the Democrats. We should consider ourselves citizens first: one person, one vote. One vote that counts."

7/21/2021K. Golden of Cobb County
"We need to ensure that district lines across our state are drawn fairly, and that those responsible for drawing the lines don't break up our communities and our political power. We need to make sure that the neighborhoods, schools, and shopping centers that our families frequent are kept together. We do not want our voices and political power to be diminished by being broken up into different districts."

7/20/2021E. Bjorge of Fulton County
Can you please tell me how I can get a response from my State Senator Brandon Beach? I cannot leave a voice mail because it's full and he does not respond to any emails.

7/20/2021P. Curtis of Putnam County
Independent Georgia residents should be on re-districting committees for fairness and accountability when drawing new maps.

7/19/2021J. Dagen of Glynn County
It is time to take redistricting out of legislators hands and assign it to an independent redistricting committee.

7/19/2021G. Dawes of Fulton County
The days and times of your town hall meetings to discuss redistricting are disappointing. Citizens who work evenings can't attend and there is no meeting in the metro Atlanta area. Just this indicates that you are only interested in feedback from a small group of citizens.

7/19/2021C. Froelich of Unknown County
"It is essential that the Georgia Legislators draw districts that give equal weight to all voter's votes! You do not choose the voters, the voters choose you!"

7/19/2021L. Gartland of DeKalb County
"We need fair and common sense districts in GA--drawn by geography and access to polls vs. party or voting tendencies. Otherwise, elections will continue to be viewed as ""rigged"" (or will, in fact, be rigged). These and other moves only work to undermine the very foundation of our democracy. They limit voting rights and contrive elections--and they sicken me and many others. They are making our society sick as well. Enough of gerrymandering! PLEASE try to win elections by focusing on ideas vs. obstacles for a change."

7/19/2021J. Parker of Clayton County
It's obvious that Georgia Legislative is not inviting Atlanta and other Counties north to participate in this reapportionment. As was vaccines were placed in those same counties and Atlanta the largest populus in Georgia was ignored. However we will be participating.

"7/19/2021Z. Darnell, Esq. of Catoosa County"
"Georgia has the opportunity to among the first states in the country to get rid of gerrymandered districts and implement fair and equitably drawn districts. Drawing districts to favor one party or, more accurately, to diminish the the votes of a particular group of people within the state is nothing short of an assault on the foundations of our democracy. One person, one vote, period. It is unconscionable to water down any person's, let alone an entire group of people's vote. The gerrymandering of districts is, without question, unconstitutional, even if there is no will by the people in charge to take any action. Our country is founded on the principle that we as a people, through our right to vote, control our own destiny and any attempt to strip that from people is outrageous. I fully support the equitable re-drawing of districts even if it were to cost my party votes."

7/19/2021M. Manrow of DeKalb County
"Transparency and straightforward apportionment are critical to the success of our democracy, and I urge the members of Georgia's reapportionment efforts to demonstrate both transparency and accountability as they meet and redraw elective office boundaries."

7/18/2021C. Littlejohn of Fulton County
"Committee Members, Multimillion dollars has been allocated and spent to accurately collect the 2020 US Census data. If used correctly, the data will offer an opportunity for fair and apportioned redistricting in our great country. I am hopeful that the reapportionment committee will not squander the opportunity to take seriously the responsibility entrusted you as legislators. I implore you to use the data in the most prudent and fairest manner. Doing so will allow for all citizens to receive the congressional representation that keeps our democracy strong. We the people... deserve fair and equitable representation of government. I pray that weeks and months of political discourse will lead you to search your hearts and choose the path of integrity. Thank you for considering my request. C. Littlejohn"

7/17/2021E. Wright of Unknown County
"I write primarily as a concerned citizen. I look at the current districting maps and see what, to me, appears to be evidence of both ""cracking"" and ""packing"" when the maps were drawn five years ago and ten years ago. It is very clear to me, and others when I show the past maps to them, that effort was made to make certain that ONE party would be favored to win in subsequent elections. The VOICE OF THE PEOPLE was not of any importance whatsoever. Only the political power (and possibly graft) of the people in power and those to come was considered in the process. I was, and am, APPALLED at the blatant disregard for the citizens of Georgia. It is CLEARLY evident to any thinking man or woman what the goal of the Redistricting Commissions have been-get and keep one particular party in power in Georgia. Well, Georgia spoke loudly in the last election. We helped put President Biden and Vice President Harris over the top. We rejected two do-nothing Senators and put two get things done Senators in their place, Jon Ossoff and Rev. Raphael Warnock. We elected more Democrats to Congress. We are telling you that you will have to listen to us ONE WAY OR THE OTHER. It will be far easier on all concerned if the districts are drawn fairly so that all candidates have a LEVEL playing field and no charges of 'cheating' or 'stolen elections' can be leveled again. Don't make the same mistakes of the past. Do it correctly this time. I beg you. Appoint an INDEPENDENT THIRD PARTY COMMISSION. Have them do the map. Not the party in charge because that leads to recriminations. Let's stop lighting fires that do not need to be lit in the first place."

7/17/2021D. Boyle of Walker County
Please pay more attention to natural geographical districts where residents fall into existing community patterns and avoid oddly shaped districts based on moving voters around to favor one party or the other.

7/16/2021S. Gridley of Dade County
"Districts should be drawn as simply as possible, with contiguous areas rather than irregular boundaries. No Precinct should have more voters than can be served in a reasonable time period. Considerations should include precinct size, number of poll workers, space for people to wait to vote, waiting line length, equipment and more, but should NOT consider political Party. Whatever is done now to cause problems for one Party will come back to bite the other Party eventually. Just be FAIR in drawing districts and precincts and it will even out over time."

7/16/2021B. Luttrell of Unknown County
"I must live in the incorrect congressional district as gerrymandering gives us the likes of Andrew Clyde, aka""no insurrection"", by passing security screens and any other ""nut job"" that he continues to declare is unconstitutional. I wonder if his next move is to bypass security at any airport he flies into and out of. This is what you Republicans have created...Marjorie Greene, etc...so continue to have at. So draw some more up as it makes for fun as you read the funny political cartoons."

7/15/2021V. Bae of DeKalb County
Please let me know what I can do to help!

7/15/2021P. McKibben of Unknown County
"Senator Kennedy & Rep Rich. Would you please bring some of your favorite redistricting postcards (you've received in the mail) to the July Town Hall meetings, and read some of them into the public record?"

7/14/2021T. Stevens of Newton County
Serving along with like minds.

7/14/2021Y. Dear of Unknown County
we are all the unitate

7/14/2021G. Pearl of Gwinnett County
STOP VOTER SUPPRESSION IN ALL WAYS!

7/14/2021D. Esposito of Unknown County

7/14/2021J. Lambert of Unknown County
"We need to ensure that district lines across our state are drawn fairly, and that those responsible for drawing the lines don't break up our communities and our political power. We need to make sure that the neighborhoods, schools, and shopping centers that our families frequent are kept together. We do not want our voices and political power to be diminished by being broken up into different districts."

7/13/2021C. Froelich of Unknown County
"Redistricting needs to be done fairly, with justice for all and malice towards none!"

7/13/2021J. Philipps of Unknown County

7/13/2021A. Stavis of Unknown County
I implore you to make sure we have a fair and transparent redistricting process. Thank you very much in advance for making sure we have a fair and transparent redistricting process.

7/13/2021P. Brown-Shinall of Bartow County
"Please provide the dates and times for the reapportionment town hall meetings for Northwest Georgia--Bartow, Floyd, Cherokee, Polk, and Paulding counties, but particularly Bartow. I did not see any meetings scheduled for my area. Thank you."

7/13/2021R. PAUL of Bryan County
"Yes, my name is Raymond Paul, and would like someone to help or give some support on getting my Unemployment Benefits received. Have not received any checks since end of March 29, 2021, any help on getting this resolved would be greatly appreciated. Thanking you in advance for your response, 912-572-8826 cell or raylpaul@coastalnow.net"

7/13/2021G. Hernandez of Unknown County
Unity against cultural imperialism is necessary

7/13/2021K. Loper of Unknown County

7/13/2021R. Rolfes of Unknown County
"The campus of Savannah State University is cut in half by a district line. Why? There are communities in coastal Georgia where one side of a street is in one district while neighbors across the street are in another. Why? The redistricting process needs to be transparent in order to be fair. Without knowing the rationale behind redistricting decisions, voters can't be sure that elections will be competitive and offer them choices that align with their ideas about what's best for their communities and the nation."

7/13/2021B. Beadles of DeKalb County
"We, as residents, won't allow representatives to choose their voters. Rather, we should choose our representatives. We need to ensure that district lines across our state are drawn fairly, and that those responsible for drawing the lines don't break up our communities and our political power. We need to make sure that the neighborhoods, schools, and shopping centers that our families frequent are kept together. We do not want our voices and political power to be diminished by being broken up into different districts. We demand a fair and transparent redistricting process."

7/13/2021S. Nambiar of Unknown County
"Please be fair in the redistricting process and ensure that the lines are drawn to reflect communities and not for arbitrary political purposes. We need a fair, reasonable and transparent process in redrawing the political maps."

7/13/2021S. Walsh of Unknown County

7/13/2021K. Krewer of Unknown County
"Athens has several communities of interest that are being disenfranchised by our current districting. Two majority African American neighborhoods are separated arbitrarily by district even though they are literally across the street from one another. Though I work for UGA and own a home less than a mile away, UGA is split off into another district entirely. I feel utterly disenfranchised as a voter by the current GA districting."

7/12/2021T. Crawford of Fulton County
I wish to see the reapportionment done in a non partisan way. As citizens of Georgia we deserve legislative lines drawn fairly not to the betterment of either political party. We have that right to expect our legislators to be impartial to anything but the census numbers.

7/12/2021L. Robinson of Cobb County
"Districts should be drawn in a non-partisan way based on some sort of geographical logic that makes sense. Priority should be given to keep cities, counties, and communities together in one district where possible and then use major roads, rivers, and bodies of water as other geographical boundaries to draw district lines. Districts should be roughly the same size when possible. Districts should never be drawn based on how many democrats or republicans can be grouped together in one district in order to dilute their voting power. Districts should not be gerrymandered to achieve maximum political power."

7/12/2021H. Simonetti of Unknown County
"What is happening in Georgia and in many other states is disgraceful and inhuman. I am a white woman who has lived a full life and have NEVER seen the race and prejudice pronouncements that are happening today. It was bad and got better, and now we are back to the starting line in this country and it is horrific to watch. We call ourselves human beings but the way many states are acting to reduce voting access and student learning our country has never been seen before; this is NOT what America was created for; We are One nation for ALL people, and anyone who does not see this does not deserve to be called an American."

7/12/2021E. Orford of Effingham County
"Dear Members of the Georgia Legislative and Congressional Reapportionment Committee, I am writing today to express my concern about the redistricting process in Georgia and specifically the makeup of Georgia's 12th Congressional District. Data from the ACLU website, what-the-district.aclu.org, shows how radically our district has changed over the past decades. The maps show that from 1933 until 1997 the district was made up of substantial portions of coastal Georgia in some cases spanning the coast from South Carolina to Florida. The counties, which made up the 12th District for over 40 years, are situated on or near the coast and share many common interests including commerce, recreation, environmental and transportation. The Port of Savannah is a major employer of my friends and neighbors in Effingham County and the I95 Corridor a crucial artery to move people and goods throughout the region. We care about the health of the Savannah River as well as the coastline of Georgia for all of the commercial and recreational opportunities these offer. These common concerns connect us as people, citizens and voters. Unfortunately, the original 12th District has been gerrymandered so severely that it is unrecognizable and unrepresentative of my city. The district no longer includes any counties that touch the coast...not ONE! The current district runs from Augusta, where the ""home office"" of my US Congressional Representative sits, and is over 100 miles and nearly 2 hours from Springfield. In contrast, Savannah (the anchor city of the original 12th District) is 25 miles from my home and the place where I do my shopping and leisure activities, receive all my medical service and participate in political activism. Effingham County residents are much more connected to Savannah than to a non-coastal city over 2 hours away! And that is why I am writing to you today. I request that you do the following things during this redistricting and reapportionment cycle: 1.) Make the process open and transparent. I and other concerned citizens of Georgia deserve a clear explanation of how district lines are drawn. We want to feel connected to our districts and we want to know that each and every vote in a district matters! 2.) Draw district lines that make sense. A district should not change so radically, as the 12th has, to go from a primarily coastal district to one without any connection to the coastal adjacent counties that share our values and concerns. 3.) Finally, let the voters choose our elected officials. When the redistricting exercise turns into a contorted process, where elected officials choose their constituents in order to preserve their seats instead of allowing the constituents to choose their representatives, we loose integrity and trust in the democratic system. I thank you for your consideration and humbly request that you put partisan politics aside in order to do the honorable work of open and fair redistricting. Sincerely, Elisabeth G. Orford 350 Berryville Road Springfield, GA 31329 Mobile: 704-989-7658"

7/12/2021A. Davis of Gwinnett County
Please protect North Gwinnett area in a conservative district. We greatly oppose having North Gwinnett carved out and combined with the 6th District. Carolyn Bourdeaux and Lucy McBath do not represent our views and we urge fairness in allowing us a conservative district that reflects our interests and values. Thank you.

7/12/2021S. Strevens of Cobb County
"Blessings. I attended the public comments meeting held at the GA Capitol. It is my first time and I'd like you to take into consideration the following: It seem you have an impossible task to do on your own. So please pray and ask God to give you guidance in drawing each district. God is the only one who knows every detail about every person, neighborhood and community. He is the God of righteousness and justice. We're praying for you as well in the matchless Name of Jesus Amen. I observed that many more speakers spoke saying that they represented organizations. The thing is organizations are not legal voters. They represented an agenda of their organization. If they truly represented legal voters, they would have directed them to this page to submit their testimony, or brought them to the meeting and have provided an interpreter, or have written statements to give the Committee Chairman/woman. Since they represent an organization which is not a legal voter, should their comments even be considered? How do you slice and dice to create a district? It's the individual's responsibility to register and then to vote. The statistics indicate that the majority of Christians are not even registered to vote. How do you even know that the Census is even accurate? Thank you. May you have clean hands and pure hearts in the sight of God when you do the redistricting and not allow presumption, personal agendas, group or organization agenda sway decisions. I have observed a lot of that in the Republican Party. Many are compromised and seem to have lost sight that they representatives and We, The People have the authority as per the our State Constitution. Thank you. 3 John 2', Psalm 91"

7/11/2021L. Katz of Chatham County
"Districts should be drawn up from communities in close proximity, which have common concerns. Any drawing of lines for political reasons, by any party, is wrongheaded."

7/11/2021H. Dean of Athens-Clarke County
Redistricting must occur based on the US census. Gerrymandering must not be allowed. Districts should not be redrawn to benefit one political party over another. Each county in Georgia deserves fair and equal representation. This can only occur when districts are drawn based on the census. Not based on which political party is currently in power.

7/11/2021J. Sink of Glynn County
St Simons Island/Sea Island needs to be one legislative district. one voice one rep....

7/11/2021S. Lanier of Ware County
"Enough already of partisan gerrymandering. Let a district reflect the true composition of its constituency. Do not draw lines to dilute any community's power. Let being a politician return to respectability, not be seen as cynical position holders grabbing for power."

7/10/2021M. Thebaut of Gwinnett County
"As a resident of North Gwinnett we need a wholly conservative district, just as there exist largely progressive/Democratic districts. For North Gwinnett to be ""chopped out"" of our district and combined with the Democratic district of the 6th Congressional District (Lucy McBath)- would be a nightmare. WE WANT CONSERVATIVE REPRESENTATION! We would support a candidate like Dr. Rich McCormick who embodies our values. Carolyn Bourdeaux DOES NOT represent the values of our community. Thank you!"

"7/10/2021B. Dudney, MD of Unknown County"
Ensure Georgians that speak all languages can give input on draft maps.

7/9/2021A. Wang of Bartow County
"Last week, I made comments to the Joint Reapportionment Committee during a town hall at Dalton State College. In addition to talking about US House District 11's boundaries, I also talked about the concept of proportional representation. I was satisfied with what I said, but there was some more stuff I wanted to add if I had more time to speak. First, even though I criticized independent redistricting commissions as inadequate compared to proportional representation, I still support the creation of one, given that we'll probably still be stuck with single member US House seats for the foreseeable future. As so many other speakers have attested, having an independent redistricting commission can prevent lawmakers from choosing their voters by intentionally packing or cracking residents. Secondly, I think if we ever adopt a proportional representation, we should consider applying it to only one chamber. Personally, I think the State Senate should be proportional while the State House remain single member district, similar to the arrangement in many Australian states. With this setup, we get a stable government/coalition in the House, while still encouraging the House to appeal to a wide swath of parties in the Senate to pass bills. You can read more about this setup, sometimes called ""semi-parliamentarianism,"" in this research paper (see especially the section on ""legislative flexibility""): https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/10361146.2018.1451487 Thirdly, I talked about looking at other countries' electoral systems to learn more about proportional representation, implying that proportional representation was some sort of foreign idea. If I had more time, though, I would have argued that proportional representation is, in fact, an American invention. I would have talked about how John Adams, our 2nd president, was probably the first person in the world to consider the idea of proportional representation when he wrote that the legislature ""should be in miniature, an exact portrait of the people at large."" I could have talked about how Pennsylvania papermaker Thomas Gilpin proposed the concept of closed party-list proportional representation, a type of proportional representation that's commonly used today. Finally I could have talked about how Alexander Hamilton, Thomas Jefferson and Daniel Webster all invented methods that are used today to apportion seats among parties. You can read more about Adam's and Gilpin's proposals in the links below, while you can easily Google the Hamilton, Jefferson and Webster apportionment methods: https://press-pubs.uchicago.edu/founders/documents/v1ch4s5.html https://www.jstor.org/stable/982902?seq=1#metadata_info_tab_contents If you ever wanted to promote proportional representation, I think emphasizing the Americanness of proportional representation will help Georgians buy into this concept. Again, thank you for allowing me to testify before the Joint Reapportionment Committee."

7/9/2021J. Genberg of Fulton County
"Dear Chair Rich, Chair Kennedy, and Committee Members: The Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC) is a non-profit, non-partisan organization dedicated to upholding the fundamental right of all citizens to vote and to ensuring that their vote is not diluted by unfair or unlawful redistricting plans. Thus, SPLC strongly encourages the Joint Redistricting Committees to engage in meaningful, open, public, and transparent dialogue with residents and community groups as you collect important information about residents, their communities of interest, and how they have been helped and harmed by redistricting in the past. Fair redistricting plans are essential if all Georgia voters are to have an opportunity to elect candidates of their choice. Redistricting plans that dilute the voting strength of people of color do not provide all Georgia voters a fair opportunity to participate in the electoral process. Unfortunately, Georgia's past redistricting plans have been marred by their deleterious effects on people of color, particularly African-American communities. The 1970 reapportionment plan boundary separating Georgia's Fifth and Sixth Congressional Districts was drawn with the purpose of fragmenting the concentration of Black residents in the area. The U.S. Attorney General objected to the plan under Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act's preclearance provisions based on the Attorney General's inability to conclude ""that [the] new boundaries [would] not have a discriminatory racial effect on voting by minimizing or diluting black voting strength in the Atlanta area."" The Department of Justice also denied Section 5 preclearance to Georgia's 1981 reapportionment plan. Joe Mack Wilson - then Chairman of the House Reapportionment Committee - dominated the 1981 redistricting process in the Georgia House of Representatives. After conducting a trial regarding the plan, a three-judge federal court found that ""Joe Mack Wilson is a racist,"" who told his colleagues on numerous occasions that ""I don't want to draw n***** districts."" After the Georgia Senate passed a redistricting plan that contained a 69% Black Fifth Congressional District, a much higher percentage than the House's proposed 51.74% Black Fifth Congressional District, the federal court found that Tom Murphy, the Speaker of the House, ""refused to appoint black persons to the conference committee [to resolve the dispute between the House and Senate] solely because they might support a plan which would allow black voters, in one district, an opportunity to elect a candidate of their choice."" The Conference Committee agreed to a 57.24% Black Fifth Congressional District after Chairman Wilson, according to Senator Kidd, ""indicated very strongly that that's as high as they (the House Conferees) could go."" Senator Bond testified that the Conference Committee provided for a Fifth Congressional District with a 57 percent Black population because ""the House Conferees knew that the 57 percent black population district was in fact a 46 percent black voting district and that a black candidate for office would be unsuccessful in that district."" After reviewing all of the evidence, the federal court concluded: The only reason the Georgia General Assembly failed to enlarge the black population in the Fifth District more than it did and failed to unite black neighborhoods was solely because the population was of the black race. There was no legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason why the Fifth District was drawn the way it was. . . . The Fifth District was drawn to suppress black voting strength in Georgia. The Department of Justice twice denied Section 5 preclearance to Georgia's 1991 State House and Senate redistricting plans, after concluding that they fragmented certain concentrations of Black population in the state to minimize the number of majority Black districts and to ensure the reelection of white incumbents at the expense of Black voters. Then, in defending its 2001 redistricting plans before another three-judge federal court, Georgia focused its expert analysis on attempting to prove that Black voters in certain districts would have an ""equal opportunity"" to elect a candidate of their choice where they composed less than a majority of the districts' voters, in an effort to avoid its obligation to draw majority-minority districts altogether. Georgia's 2011 redistricting plan passed despite the opposition of 40 out of 41 Black representatives in the House of Representatives, and the opposition of all Black senators in the Senate. Black Congressman and civil rights icon, John Lewis, described the 2011 redistricting plan as ""an affront to the spirit and the letter of the Voting Rights Act."" This history is just a snapshot as to why it is imperative that communities of color provide meaningful input to avoid any dilution of their voting strength. Unfortunately, the public town halls that are currently scheduled do not sufficiently engage communities because the public does not have enough information, including census data, draft maps, or information about the special legislative session and other legislative meetings, to provide the Committees with the full range of information it needs to make the proper determinations in drawing district lines. Instead, Georgians continue to be met with an opaque system that forces them to engage in a process when both they and the Committees lack information that is vital for the redistricting process. According to the Census Bureau, redistricting data may not be available to the states until September 30, 2021, thus well-after the Joint Redistricting Committees' last-scheduled summer town hall. Therefore, SPLC strongly encourages the Joint Redistricting Committees to provide ample additional opportunities for public testimony. For any public input sessions, including opportunities for public testimony on any draft maps and/or redistricting legislation, the Joint Redistricting Committees should: * adopt uniform and transparent procedures for public testimony that ensure equal and full access for people with disabilities to provide input in-person as well as accessible remote testimony options for all hearings, including delegation meetings that will consider and approve county commission and county school board maps; * post public-input procedures online and establish mechanisms for the public to sign-up in advance; * engage in an informative and responsive process, for instance, by hosting Q & A sessions between Joint Redistricting Committee members and members of the public; * provide census data, draft maps, information regarding the legislative procedures and guidelines for considering redistricting bills, and all legislative language, including bills, amendments, and substitutes, on the General Assembly website at least 24 hours before any language is considered or voted upon by any Committee or on the House or Senate floor; * provide all of the above information in languages required to reach diverse Georgians, but at least Spanish, Korean, Vietnamese, Mandarin/Cantonese, Hindi, Arabic and ASL; and * ensure any website used to broadcast public input sessions or hearings to consider maps and legislation must be compliant with Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act so that voters with disabilities can access the meetings, hearings, and sessions. We hope that the Joint Redistricting Committees provide a redistricting process that strives to produce redistricting plans which are fair to all persons living in Georgia. Sincerely, /s/ Jack Genberg Jack Genberg, Senior Staff Attorney Pichaya Poy Winichakul, Staff Attorney Kayla Kane, Data and Research Analyst Southern Poverty Law Center P.O. Box 1287 Decatur, GA 30031-1287 (404) 521-6700 Jack.Genberg@splcenter.org Poy.Winichakul@splcenter.org Kayla.Kane@splcenter.org"

7/9/2021D. Gladson of Jackson County
"I am writing with concern about the redistricting process, which appears illogical and partisan. Take for instance, Clarke County. It is the smallest county in Georgia and yet it has 3 State house seats and 2 state senator seats. Why in the world would that?!? This results in favoring lower population areas AROUND Athens and favoring the voices of a few. That is not democracy. It takes away the voices of Clarke County which is also highly representative of people of color. Follow logical political lines - so that EVERYBODY feels represented. That is good for communities and good for our democracy. As a result, Athens would have 2 State House Reps and 1 State Senator. Honor our right to self-determination."

7/9/2021D. Miller of Athens-Clarke County
"Please share your models publically for comments and feedback at several points before adoption. Clarke Co has been sliced and diced until I feel completely unrepresented in the US House (more like MIS-represented) and see no rationale for my GA congressional districts -- I'm in the 46th and 119th, but two streets over there are different districts and candidates representing my neighbors. I would much prefer a neutral commission building assignments on fair non-partisan representation of coherent populations."

7/9/2021A. Crain of Athens-Clarke County
"I would like to speak in support of fair and representative redistricting for Athens. As a leading center of education nationally and within the state of Georgia, Athens has much to contribute to public dialogue and policy-making. However, our current districts at both the state and U.S. Congressional level are simply unfair, leading to representation that does not truly speak for the people of Athens. Please do the right thing and apportion our districts fairly - we are counting on you for a transparent and equitable process to invest in the health of our democracy!"

7/9/2021B. of Unknown County
Please help

7/9/2021M. Bissell of Unknown County

7/8/2021C. Henry of DeKalb County
"A fair and open redistricting process in Georgia is paramount to the public's trust in Georgia election integrity. No lines can be drawn and voted on until all citizens have a chance to be heard, submit comments and review the process. Everything about this must be open and transparent. No more gerrymandering of districts to win elections and divide communities."

7/8/2021A. Januzzi of Unknown County

7/8/2021A. Bernstein of Unknown County
Please allow *all* Georgians to have input on legislative maps.

7/8/2021J. Langford of Madison County
I support these equity proposals & would add women's equality with passage of the ERA!

7/8/2021C. of Athens-Clarke County

7/7/2021J. Frohn of Unknown County

7/7/2021M. of Unknown County
reapportionment has become a political by scared policy-less right. It need to be about the numbers and geography

7/7/2021C. Nguyen of Washington County
Legislators need to be accountable to Georgia's community in the redistricting process. Being transparent about the process with Georgians is critical. People need to know the criteria and data you are using to draw the maps.

7/7/2021K. Walsh of Unknown County
You still have time to be transparent about the process with Georgians who have repeatedly asked for more information about the criteria and data you are using to draw the maps.

7/7/2021K. of Unknown County

7/7/2021C. Guy of Glascock County
"I would like for the next redistricting process to eliminate purposeful gerrymandering in the state of Georgia. Politicians should not be able to draw lines that help further benefit themselves. District lines should be drawn to help each individual get their voice heard by a qualified politician without having to rely on the basis of one particular party or another. Ideally, I would like for independently drawn districts instead of those drawn by those in the Georgia legislature as they have an incentive to purposefully craft districts that benefit themselves."

7/7/2021N. Jones of Richmond County
The redistricting must not reflect Gerrymandering favoring any political parties or counties in the State of Georgia. The votes don't need to be diluted.

7/7/2021T. DeLuca of Unknown County
Quit the gerrymandering and #DefendDemocrcy

7/7/2021J. Finlay-Kochanowski of Unknown County

7/7/2021S. Vogel of Unknown County
Please ensure that Georgians who speak all languages are able to give input on draft maps.

7/7/2021B. of Baldwin County
"I oppose partisan redistricting, and would prefer an independent commission, to produce continuously fair outcomes in future elections."

7/7/2021B. Juhl of Unknown County
You still have time to be transparent about the process with Georgians who have repeatedly asked for more information about the criteria and data you are using to draw the maps. Georgians who speak all languages must be able to give input on draft maps.

7/7/2021E. Darby of Unknown County
GREAT idea Georgia. Thanks for leading the way for the rest of us.

7/7/2021S. Kay of Unknown County
"It's only every 10 years that we get an opportunity to redraw district lines. Redistricting impacts the way members of the U.S. Congress, Georgia's General Assembly, County Commission, School Boards, and city officials get elected and represent us. I'm asking that my elected officials to ensure that Georgians that speak all languages are able to give input on draft maps. You still have time to make translations and accommodations for interpretation as part of the redistricting process. You still have time to be transparent about the process with Georgians who have repeatedly asked for more information about the criteria and data you are using to draw the maps."

7/7/2021C. Butler-Mayes of Athens-Clarke County
You still have time to make translations and accommodations for interpretation as part of the redistricting process. You still have time to be transparent about the process with Georgians who have repeatedly asked for more information about the criteria and data you are using to draw the maps. Ensure that Georgians that speak all languages are able to give input on draft maps.

7/7/2021F. Goff of Unknown County
Stop the Criminal Oligarchy in GA

7/7/2021A. Lambeth of DeKalb County
"Information accessibility is foundational to a democratic system for the people, and language equity is an essential part of this accessibility. If we aspire to be the nation we hope to be, we must not only lower barriers of entry for civic engagement but actively facilitate participation from constituents."

7/7/2021A. Stavis of Unknown County

7/7/2021S. Donald of Unknown County

7/7/2021J. Olive of Athens-Clarke County
"A key requirement of re-districting is to keep ""Communities of Interest"" together so that their representative can ACTUALLY represent those interests. In the re-districting that occurred in 2011, Athens-Clarke County's two democratic House districts were gerrymandered into three districts, only one of which was contained wholly in ACC (118). The other two districts (117 & 119) were combined with rural counties adjacent to ACC, guaranteeing Republican victories in those two districts. For 7 years, no democrat would even run in those two districts as they knew it was a waste of money and effort. In 2017, both republican incumbents were appointed to state offices and a special election was called. For the first time in 7 years we had Democratic candidates willing to run and they won! Obviously, the rural Republican voters didn't bother to show up for that special election but did so in record numbers in 2018, once again, guaranteeing Republican victories for House districts 117 and 119. These victories were repeated in 2020 despite record turnouts from both parties. The representatives for HD 117 and 118 do NOT represent the values and interests of the 70% of ACC residents that did NOT vote for them. Athens is an urban district (the fifth largest urban area in Georgia with over 120,000 residents in the smallest county by geography in Georgia). The needs and values of this urban county are different from those of the other rural 60% of these two districts. I urge the two committees to return ACC to two House Districts, fully contained within ACC and to also adjust the Senate districts so that only one senator can fully represent the needs of ACC instead of having ACC split between two rural senate districts. Thank you for considering this request and I hope both committees can put Partisanship aside and let the voters choose their representatives instead of the party in power choosing their voters!"

7/6/2021B. Lopez of Athens-Clarke County
"I moved to Athens about 3 years ago. At first, I didn't appreciate how knit tight our community was. I felt like a stranger even though I was welcomed with open arms. Now, even though I'm not a Athens native, I truly appreciate it for everything it is. The good and the bad. Dividing our community shuts off our voices. It doesn't honor the ""we"" that starts our constitution. I want to be part of the group that proudly will represent Athens. From North Avenue to Epps bridge. The re districting progress needs to be fair and transparent. To those making the decisions for the collective, make sure you don't contribute to voter oppression. Your community, the Athens community, counts on you."

7/6/2021M. McCoy of Baldwin County
I oppose partisan redistricting and would prefer and independent commission.

7/6/2021B. of Baldwin County
"I oppose partisan redistricting, and would prefer an independent commission, to produce continuously fair outcomes in future elections."

7/6/2021B. Perrine of Athens-Clarke County
"The right to vote for our elected officials is just that, our right. It is the right of the people to choose their representatives and executives, not the right of those elected to choose who they represent. That's exactly what happens in Georgia every ten years during redistricting. Those in power draw maps to keep themselves and their party in power, while ignoring the will of the people. The only fair way to redistrict our state is through a nonpartisan commission that doesn't look at voting records, population makeup, and anything that could be used to help any one political party. An independent body would allow the people to be truly represented."

7/6/2021P. Walker of Athens-Clarke County
Gerrymandering was wrong when Democrats did it and it is wrong when Republicans do it. Please give us fair representation with nonpartisan maps so my city of Athens - an area of common interests without a doubt - can have a chance to have its issues addressed at the state and national levels.

7/6/2021L. Fryer of Unknown County
Will equity and racial inclusion be guaranteed?

7/6/2021M. Johnson of Athens-Clarke County
"My name's Mokah Jasmine Johnson and I'm an Athens resident. I have many roles in my community, including activist, artist, and entrepreneur, but today I want to speak to you in another one of my roles: educator. I think we can learn a lot about our present by examining our past, so I want to start out with some history. In 1868, during the Reconstruction period 33 Black Georgians, were elected to our State House. That included Madison Davis and Alfred Richardson, who both represented my county, Clarke County. But the Georgia Supreme Court, the white majority, and Ku Klux Klan all worked together to block Black Georgians from political power. In the end, one quarter of the Original 33 were killed, threatened, beaten, or jailed. We're seeing echoes of this again today. The people in power are doing everything they can to suppress the Black vote and keep us out of power -- and one of the main ways they can do that is through the districts they draw. You see, I live in Athens-Clarke County and when you can have three neighbors living on the same street in three different districts, they're causing political confusion. About 28% of our county is African Americans and we need proper representation. For years Georgia's maps have been drawn to benefit the Republican party and Athens has been one of the most gerrymandered cities in the state. So when our community gets split into three State House Districts, two State Senate Districts, and two Congressional Districts, we know why that's happening. They're trying to divide us up so that we will be less powerful and taking away our power to elect leaders who represent our community's best interest. It's working, too. Organizers in our community have fought so hard for gun violence prevention, voting rights, ending cash bail, and a budget that reflects our priorities of ending poverty and the school-to-prison pipeline. But every time we are able to come together and work with our city council to bring about the change that we want, our Representative in Atlanta introduces a new bill to take away our local control and diminish our agency. So this year, when you draw the new districts, I am asking that you learn the lessons of our past so that we can finally move forward into the democracy we were promised, where we have the power to elect leaders who truly represent our communities and every vote counts."

7/6/2021M. Zuniga of Athens-Clarke County
Wish to speak

7/6/2021N. Freeman of Athens-Clarke County
Why should rural and urban districts be included in the same district when their interests are so significantly different?

7/6/2021N. Freeman of Athens-Clarke County
"Why can't the joint redistricting committee adopt a principle of not splitting counties. For example, Clarke county is split between two congressional districts and between two state senate districts. The purpose of these splits is to dilute the voting strength of a distinct community of interest"

7/6/2021C. Lapp of Unknown County
"Many thanks to the Redistricting Committee for traveling throughout Georgia to listen to voters on this important subject. My name is Dr. Carol Lapp, and I've been a resident of the Central Savannah River Area for almost 50 years. As the immediate past President of the CSRA League of Women Voters, I have been following closely the progress of the hearings. I would like to use this forum to emphasize several points that have been raised by others. Please listen carefully to the members of communities that ask to be grouped together in newly-drawn districts. If communities have common interests, they should expect their elected representative to be responsive to those interests. An example of that will likely occur in the CSRA, where slightly more than 3 House Districts will need to be drawn. The folks that live outside those areas might be more rural than the nearest Augusta population, and it might make more sense to combine those voters with a neighboring rural community. A similar issue might occur with the Senate, although most Augusta voters should fit into one district, with the remainder combined with adjacent Columbia County voters. Although we appreciate the widespread hearings that are scheduled, we hope that the resulting deliberative processes will be transparent, so that voters will be able to follow along, and perhaps offer advice. We especially want to emphasize the need for a two-week period of study and input between the presentation of the proposed maps and the final legislative vote. Ideally, we hope the members of this Committee will agree to subject the proposed maps to independent and nonpartisan benchmarks, such as those that will be available from the Princeton Gerrymandering Project. This Committee has a significant advantage over the legislators of the past because the technology supporting redistricting efforts is now so superior to what was previously available. We earnestly hope that our legislators will use this technology to produce FAIR DISTRICTS and FAIR VOTING RIGHTS for all eligible voters! Thank you for your attention to this matter. Carol A. Lapp, Ph.D."

7/6/2021N. Freeman of Athens-Clarke County
"Why can't the joint redistricting committee adopt a principle of not splitting counties. For example, Clarke county is split between two congressional districts and between two state senate districts. The purpose of these splits is to dilute the voting strength of a distinct community of interest"

7/6/2021L. Majersky of Unknown County
"Athens should not be broken up into different legislative districts. We are the smallest county in Georgia, with a very limited property and local tax base, due to the University, local schools, and many tax-free church properties. We are also a central location of many needed services for the surrounding ten county area. We have a high poverty rate. As such, we should be able to be represented by members of the state government who will stand up for our needs for funding, as well as our voting rights. For too long we have been unjustly denied the representation we should have, due to being split up under the Georgia Republicans' actions to disempower our people with their gerrymandering. It is time to reunite the political base of Athens/Clarke County."

7/6/2021P. Figueroa of Athens-Clarke County

7/6/2021J. Williamson of Unknown County
"My name is Keyes Williamson. I live at 180 Plum Nelly Road (In House District 117 and Senate District 046) I believe there should be a non-partisan commission appointed to draw up political districts in Georgia, because the party in power cannot be trusted to do it in a fair and equitable way. The Democrats did it unfairly in 2000 and the Republicans did it unfairly in 2006 and after the 2010 census. The fact of the matter is that any American who truly believes in Democracy, must reject the gerrymandering of political districts to benefit one political party over another. It is a direct violation of the principles upon which our country was built; and it contradicts good common sense. When Governor Nathan Deal signed the current Congressional redistricting map, he said ""The Legislature has drawn districts that are compact, that keep communities of interest together and that visually make sense."" Athens, our community, is divided into two state districts, three state House districts, and two U.S. Congressional districts. Does this pass the smell test suggested by the Governor himself? No. We are the smallest county in the state, how does it make sense to divide it, if it is not intended to split our community's political voice for partisan reasons. As a result, our city cannot fairly select a representative to the state or U.S. legislatures that will represent the values of this community and to advocate for those issues that are important to the majority of our community members: better police policy, lower crime, better schools, less economic disparity, etc. We all know, because it is obvious, that Athens was split to manipulate the vote to predetermine the outcome of the election. If you look back at the results of past elections, you can see the swing from one party to another, not based on the qualifications of the candidates or the popularity of their platforms, the results are driven by the arbitrary and partisan districting maps. In the words of political professor Charles Bullock, the party in power was ""drawing Clarke County to benefit themselves."" This is un-American. History is not on the side of those who defend legislative districts drawn to dilute the will of the people. It is clear that the founding fathers would frown upon the kinds of districts we have in Georgia. James Madison warned the Constitution Convention that state legislatures would ""mold their regulations to favor candidates they wished to succeed."" He called this an ""abuse"" of power. President Harrison, in 1891, called the practice ""political robbery"" that suppressed ""popular suffrage."" It was, he said, ""our chief national danger."" The practice of splitting voters to predetermine elections, is, in short, at odds with our constitution and the values that make America unique. From the Declaration of Independence to the Constitution, elected democracy was constructed upon the principle that EVERY VOTE MATTERS. The current districts in Athens violate that sacred principle."

7/6/2021J. Williamson of Athens-Clarke County
"I'd like to say hello and thank you to the committee members for coming here today to listen to the people of Athens and its surrounding communities. My name is Logan Williamson; I've lived in Athens for fourteen years and I'm a Foundation Fellow at University of Georgia. Currently, UGA main campus is split between GA House Districts 117, 118, and 119 in a way that there are on-campus dorm residents in all three districts. Even more than this, depending on where we live off-campus within Clarke County, we may be sectioned off into different Georgia State Senate or Federal House districts with different representatives and different elections. As UGA students, we will move into the future to majorly impact, change, and improve industry and the economy both in Georgia and nationally, but we are fractured in electing our representatives. Even more, UGA professors and faculty, many of whom I've taken classes from or are parents of my friends, stay in Athens more permanently than students and are also broken up by the current districting of Clarke County. With better districts, our residents could vote for representatives will prioritize issues specific to Athens, like the USG system, public transportation, parks and green spaces, public education, programs for homeless citizens, and many other issues that are distinct from those in other communities that we share districts with. The current districts are a disservice to both students here and permanent residents, preventing both sets of voters from easily organizing for important priorities. By splitting and unnecessarily grouping this unique community, our elections and representation are diluted by more rural regions that are very different from Clarke County in many ways. The result of this is that both in Clarke and the surrounding areas, we can't pressure our representatives for issues on behalf of the needs of our district, because these needs differ and diverge because of unrepresentative districting. In the upcoming redistricting process, I ask that you enable Clarke County to have districts that prioritize the unity of our community. Democracy is effective because our representatives are meant to advocate for the needs of their constituents, I hope that you let the redistricting process keep this true for the constituents living in Athens-Clarke County. Please prioritize unity of the UGA campus in the level of state house districts and the unity of Clarke County in all levels of districting. Thank you for your time."

7/6/2021E. of Unknown County
"Our voices need to be heard. We are stuck in a system against the people and there votes, this needs to be changed."

7/6/2021A. Ghimire of Athens-Clarke County

7/6/2021B. Lopez of Athens-Clarke County
"I moved to Athens about 3 years ago. At first, I didn't appreciate how knit tight our community was. I felt like a stranger even though I was welcomed with open arms. Now, even though I'm not a Athens native, I truly appreciate it for everything it is. The good and the bad. Dividing our community shuts off our voices. It doesn't honor the ""we"" that starts our constitution. I want to be part of the group that proudly will represent Athens. From North Avenue to Epps bridge. The re districting progress needs to be fair and transparent. To those making the decisions for the collective, make sure you don't contribute to voter oppression. Your community, the Athens community, counts on you."

7/6/2021L. Aiken of Unknown County
Why is Athens 'cracked' in half? Why is redistricting held behind closed doors? Why are there no laws or Fed/State guidance for redistricting?

7/6/2021G. Aleman of Athens-Clarke County

7/6/2021E. Farrell of Athens-Clarke County

7/5/2021L. Lowe of DeKalb County
"I would encourage the legislature to approach redistricting via a bipartisan and transparent manner. The public should be able to see maps and offer feedback from the inception of the process. It is extremely hard to take politics out of a political process. However, you can show good will by accepting input from an equal amount of Democrats, Republicans and the public. Georgia is now a 50/50 state, and maps should be competitive and representative of the state's makeup."

7/5/2021K. Kirby of Athens-Clarke County
Athens is a divided city due to unjust gerrymandering. It's a crime that Athens is split between two Congressional districts.

7/5/2021A. Steedley of DeKalb County
"I am deeply concerned by the lack of public hearings to be held in densely populated urban areas within Georgia, which are those areas experiencing the greatest change in population and demographics. I participated as an election monitor in three recounts last year, and it is clear that elections in Georgia will be subject to ongoing national scrutiny. To develop a system as important as redistricting without adequate public input will raise divisive questions, undermine confidence in the results, and limit our ability to host free and fair elections that represent the will of the people of Georgia. Please open up more hearings, in particular in areas with larger groups of voters who will be more impacted by the changes."

7/5/2021M. McCarthy of DeKalb County
"Good afternoon to the Honorable Members of the Joint Reapportionment and Redistricting Committees, My name is Marci McCarthy and I am the Chairman of the DeKalb GOP representing over 101K Republican and right-leaning voters. DeKalb County currently resides in the 4th, 5th, and 6th Congressional Districts with the 6th District comprising 45% of our electorate albeit it is our smallest congressional district geography-wise. Like much of the metro Atlanta, DeKalb is a now a blue desert sprinkled with red and pink islands versus a purple pasture. Right leaning voters in DeKalb County have no representation in Congress, the Capitol and in City Hall - and have become disenfranchised. Because of the continued failures of the party in power, we have equity instead of equality, division instead of diversity and a crime wave that affects all lives and livelihoods. Continuing to ignore the full spectrum of legal voters has created the rise and terror of Stacey Abrams in Georgia. The Constitution protects Americans' right to vote, it does not give a voter's political party a right to win. There is no individual right in the Constitution to live in a district that elects a candidate from an individual's political party, and everyone's definition or conception or 'measure' of ""partisan fairness"" is different. On behalf of all Georgia's legal voters, I am asking today that the General Assembly take into consideration three things when redrawing our maps: (1) Adhere to Constitutional Redistricting and to comply with the Voting Rights Act as well as adhere to all other federal and state laws. (2) Have Clean Redistricting: Districts should be sufficiently compact and preserve communities of interest by respecting municipal and county boundaries. Districts should avoid combining disparate populations to the extent possible. (3) Commonsense Redistricting: Redistricting impacts all Americans and all Americans should be able to look at their district and understand why it was drawn the way it was. Districts don't need to be bizarrely shaped. Let's not give the ammo to sue until its' blue, give untethered power to unelected judges and most importantly ignore democracy or the Constitution. Simply put I am asking all of you to bring Democracy back to DeKalb. Thank you. Marci McCarthy Chairman, The DeKalb Republican Party"

7/5/2021K. Menke of Athens-Clarke County
"Among the criteria for redistricting cited by the National Conference of State Legislatures is the adherence ""to pre-existing political subdivisions (such as city and county lines)"". I live in the smallest county in Georgia which was divided by the last redistricting into three Georgia House Districts, two Georgia State Senate Districts, and two US House Districts. It appears that the 2010 Redistricting was way off the mark in its maps for all three offices and, in fact, weakened our say in all of these elections of our leaders. I urge you this time to be fairer to our county and follow the above criteria."

7/5/2021S. Piazza of Athens-Clarke County
"When redistricting, please remember that short term victories only lead to long-term division. Please choose integrity in the democratic process rather than strategies for unsustainable victories. Maintaining power does not result in policies that solve problems. Fairness and cooperation address issues in a meaningful way for all citizens. Thank you."

7/4/2021C. Luke of Athens-Clarke County
"Hello! I'm Charlotte, and I have resided in Athens-Clarke County (ACC) since 2002. ACC is not at all accurately represented by the current congressional district map because it is split in half between the 9th and 10th districts. As a result, the elected members of Congress for the 9th and 10th districts, Andrew Clyde and Jody Hice respectively, reflect the political opposite of the majority of ACC residents. If the map were redrawn such that ACC were unified under one district, ACC residents would finally have the chance to receive accurate representation in Congress."

7/3/2021A. Snyder of Macon-Bibb County
"Currently, Georgia's legislators get to pick their voters. The answer the voter gets is ""both parties draw lines to their own advantage."" While completely legal the redistricting process in the hands of the legislature is and always has been unethical. It allows the legislators to draw their own political boundaries and decide who they want as their constituents. The legislator becomes so sure of their incumbency, they don't have to listen to constituents or hold town halls. Decisions about laws become ""whatever the party wants"" rather than what the voter wants. The joint committee must draw maps with a focus on integrity, not incumbency."

7/2/2021A. Norman of Unknown County
"David S Libscomb attorney in Gwinnett County working with the Braselton Police and a Gwinnett County Officer to set up individuals by using cameras and money obtained by fraud, threatening people to commit crimes for them. I was set up David S Libscomb, Vincent Price of Cotton Cafe Restaurant and put Jail with Braselton Police on harrasing emails that they made up and sent to each other because I caught them committing crimes including fraud etc. David and Justin Ken Norman paid 3 separate individuals to harm me while including being shoot twice in the woods while hunting once by Clay Collins 13 McCroy St in Sugarhill Ga and shoot a with Compound Bow by my brother Justin Norman in Chateau Elan."

7/2/2021A. Norman of Unknown County
"unty working with the Braselton Police and a Gwinnett County Officer to set up individuals by using cameras and money obtained by fraud, threatening people to commit crimes for them. I was set up David S Libscomb, Vincent Price of Cotton Cafe Restaurant and put Jail with Braselton Police on harrasing emails that they made up and sent to each other because I caught them committing crimes including fraud etc. David and Justin Ken Norman paid 3 separate individuals to harm me while including being shoot twice in the woods while hunting once by Clay Collins 13 McCroy St in Sugarhill Ga and shoot a with Compound Bow by my brother Justin Norman in Chateau Elan."

7/2/2021J. Jess of Cobb County
"My comments concern the 6th Congressional District. Please take Dekalb County out of the 6th District. It was never part of the 6th District until 10 years ago when the district was redrawn. Dekalb County is an urban county, with little in common with the rest of the 6th District. An urban Democrat now serves as our member of Congress, and she has little in common with most of the residents. She was elected because of Dekalb County. She does not represent the interests of a majority of citizens within this district. I would rather see the 6th District include part of Cherokee County, which is a suburban area, and has much more in common with North Fulton and East Cobb. Thank you for your consideration."

7/2/2021A. Buice of Camden County
"Please keep the cities and counties together when redistricting. Also, please consider utilizing a neutral redistricting program instead of partisan gerrymandering."

7/2/2021P. Tomporowski of Athens-Clarke County
"Redistricting will likely be a charade, but I still have the right under the Constitution to tell the Republican members of the legislature who are truly in charge of manipulating redistricting that it is wrong, wrong, wrong. I would hope the committee members in the house and senate realize the majority of GA's citizens want fair and safe elections where every voice can be heard and heeded. Gerrymandering and gross redistricting shenanigans are bad for GA and bad for Republicans in the long run. Simply do the right thing."

7/2/2021R. Smith of Athens-Clarke County
Republicans control redistricting even though GA is no longer a strong Republican state. Georgia is now a reasonably balanced state with both Republican and Democratic voters who want FAIR ELECTIONS that GIVE EVERYONE A VOICE. Please do the right thing now. No more back-room deals on redistricting. Let voters select their representatives. To do otherwise skews policy development for the worse (at the behest of powerful lobbyists and fringe elements). Very soon Republicans may rue the day they denied democracy to GA citizens. We will remember how you behave this Fall.

7/2/2021J. Morton of Chatham County
"Given the importance of the upcoming redistricting process to our legislative priorities in the coming years, I was terribly disappointed to see that, while there are multiple town hall hearings scheduled across the state, there are NONE in Savannah/Chatham."

7/2/2021N. Tisdale of Athens-Clarke County
"Athens is currently divided into so many parts of districts that our needs and views are diluted such that we have less voice in state legislature. As the smallest county in Georgia, we do NOT need to be so divided. Please use logic to create districts so that voters with have someone to represent their views. Thanks."

7/2/2021A. Sweetapple of Oconee County
Why must you rely on gerrymandering to win an election? Why do you have no honor?

7/2/2021R. Cook of Fulton County
"Stop partisan gerrymandering. If the GOP is worried about retaining power in Georgia, it should reevaluate its agenda and messaging, not attempt to rig elections. Everyone is watching."

7/1/2021M. Dekle of Fulton County
"I oppose any effort to redraw the lines of GA6 or GA7 in an attempt to dilute Democrat voting strength. This is gerrymandering and it is wrong. I live in GA6 and Rep. McBath has represented our district well during her time in office and worked hard for us. This is why she was resoundingly re-elected. Clearly if you are considering these back door efforts to shore up votes then you message and platform is sadly lacking and is causing Georgians to vote for others. I voted Republican in every Presidential election from 1980 up until the 2016 election when I could no longer support the GOP. If your party is represented by people like Trump, Josh Hawley, Marjorie Taylor Greene, Lauren Boebart and others who supported the insurrection and terrorist actions on January 6th then I want no part of it. Georgia has been purple for a while in many areas like my district and the message of racism, misogyny, sexism, bigotry, greed is why we turned it blue. Leave the 6th district alone, we are doing fine. If you want us to listen, change your message."

7/1/2021L. Crum of Athens-Clarke County
"I live in a two split between districts. In pieces, we in Athens often find our interests and ideals for the state of Georgia ignored and unimportant. Our representatives do not hear us, as diluted we don't make an appreciable impact on their voting numbers. Do the right thing and place Athens in a unified district, so that our voices may be heard."

7/1/2021K. Blane of Unknown County
"Redistricting should be done by a bipartisan panel to ensure fairness and an end to this toxic political polarization that is gripping our country. By carving up municipalities such as Athens into 3 state reps and 2 senators, it dilutes the voices of the many to favor the minority. This is not effective or fair democracy. We need moderates who listen to all voices instead of the extremists we have now."

7/1/2021C. Frost of Cobb County
"Regarding the review of districts #7 and #6 - there is no need to redraw them with the goal of installing another Republican in the US Congress. Focus on changing people's minds with what you will do for them, rather than gerrymandering your way to a win. Those districts, especially 6 (created so Newt Gingrich could win a seat), have become competitive for a reason."

7/1/2021M. Navarre-Jones of Unknown County
Please try to keep our districts aligned with local counties and populations rather than moving lines just to help either party. I want to feel like my vote matters and my representatives are people who know my area.

7/1/2021E. Garcia of Hall County
"Dalton Testimony June 30th, 2021 Hello my name is Elton Garcia I am a University of Georgia graduate born and raised in Gainesville, GA that is apart of the 9th congressional district. I am a community organizer at the Georgia Association of Latino Elected Officials (GALEO), Co-chair of the Georgia Latino Redistricting Caucus, and a member of the Georgia Redistricting Alliance. The Georgia Redistricting Alliance is a group of organizations advocating for immigrant, BIPOC, and LGBTQ communities to advocate for fair, transparent, and inclusive maps during the 2021 redistricting process. As a resident of Gainesville, one-third of the population in Hall county is Spanish speaking and they are also part of the immigrant workforce that drives the poultry industry within the county. I am here today, two hours away from my hometown, because the City of Dalton mirrors my community of Gainesville where the immigrant workforce here is what drives the carpet industry. I have realized that both Dalton and Gainesville share the same language access struggles in the redistricting process, thereby denying meaningful opportunities for participation for these hard working communities. These language groups are a vital component of the redistricting process,because of the Voting Rights Act, and they are a specific community of interest since they run the carpet and poultry capitals of the world. These communities deserve to play a role in what districts they are being drawn into, and advocate for districts demonstrating their collective shared interests, and not be marginalized nor packed into as few districts as possible, just to preserve partisan influence in districts. They deserve transparency of the entire process in their own language with all Georgia residents viewing and commenting on the final maps before they go to a vote. With a large segment of Spanish-speaking residents, how is this committee going to have a hearing in Dalton and not have a translator on site, or provide information in languages other than English? !Nosotros merecemos ser parte del proceso! Sean justos y no dibujen sus mapas para dibujar sus votos! !Ensenanos que nosotros podremos confiar en ustedes! If you were not able to understand what I just said this is the reason why we need language access because my community heard me and now you know how excluded they feel. We deserve to be a part of the process. Be just, be transparent, and be fair.. Show us that we can confide you. Thank you."

7/1/2021M. Riley of Bulloch County
"Redistricting must be carefully evaluated and transparent to avoid racial and partisan gerrymandering and to accurately reflect the population. It is very important to me that colleges and universities as well as predominantly Black, densely populated areas are redistricted properly to ensure fair representation and to ensure voting is accessible to everyone."

7/1/2021J. Parsons of Richmond County
"Maps should be drawn by an independent commission, not legislatures. No matter which party is in power, the tendency is to protect your seat, not what is fair to the voters. If you truly believe in our country's democratic ideals, please take a stand for fair redistricting."

7/1/2021K. Souza of Unknown County
Athens is purposely divided to dilute the views of the residents. I bitterly resent this action and will never vote for Republicans in the state of Georgia.

7/1/2021V. Kempiners of Fulton County
Do not change the boundaries. Any attempt to artificially steal a seat from Democrats or to inflate the need for another Republican is gerrymandering and dishonest. You need to accept the fact that GA is becoming blue.

7/1/2021K. Hamilton of Fayette County
Please do not restructure GA 06/07. This is gerrymandering to those districts.

7/1/2021M. Powers of Madison County
"It's time for redistributing in Georgia to be done in a nonpartisan way. My neighboring county, despite being the smallest in the state, is hacked up like hamburger. Why? To divide up the vast tracts of land? No. To divide up the left leaning voters so they'll have less impact on state elections. Please fix this."

7/1/2021C. Wells of Oconee County
"I am concerned that my town of Athens, GA which is a unique and culturally distinct community has been split into multiple districts. We should be reunited in a process that is open to the public and uses standards to maintain partisan balance. And to make sure that the process is free from partisan tampering, it should be subject to review by an independent citizen advisory board. Democrats and Republicans have been guilty of gerrymandering in the past in our state. This practice does not have to be repeated in the future! There are statistical tools to make redistricting fair and balanced. Let's use them."

7/1/2021C. County of Richmond County
"DBHDD-ECRH engages in corrupt behavior on a daily bases. The leadership are not working from a ethical standpoint. Hundreds of people suffer from the lawlessness of this organization. The falsification of documentation started in the Training department, human resource is involved. The entire crew is dirty."

6/30/2021K. Lawler of Fulton County
"The text below is from a letter sent to the committees on April 19, 2021 and provided in person to the chairs on June 29, 2021. The original letter is on Fair Districts GA letterhead ================================================= April 19, 2021 To: The Honorable Geoff Duncan, Lieutenant Governor, Georgia State Senate The Honorable David Ralston, Speaker of the Georgia House of Representatives All members of Georgia House Legislative & Congressional Reapportionment Committee All members of Georgia Senate Reapportionment & Redistricting Committee From: The undersigned coalition of organizations Subject: Public participation in the upcoming redistricting process Dear Lt. Gov. Duncan, Speaker Ralston, Senators, and Representatives: We the undersigned organizations urge you to adopt new guidelines for redistricting that improve public access, public participation and provide more opportunity for timely public comment. Georgians deserve a redistricting process that inspires trust and confidence from all citizens. In the past, the bulk of the redistricting work has taken place behind closed doors with only minimal public involvement and disclosure. As the law now stands, all legislative communications with the LCRO are by statute deemed legally confidential communications. In addition, both the Open Records and Open Meetings Acts do not apply to the General Assembly. Those secrecy provisions should be waived during all reapportionment deliberations by the General Assembly. Furthermore, Georgia has almost no laws guiding the development of redistricting plans. The information released for proposed plans is very minimal and not timely enough to allow citizens to comment or advocate for changes before votes are taken in the special legislative session. During the 2011 cycle, House and Senate provided guidelines under which the committees and legislative staff operated. We have reviewed those guidelines and find that they provide inadequate public disclosure and lack of opportunity for citizen input. In addition to a general waiver of the secrecy provisions noted above, we respectfully submit for your consideration the following provisions for the guidelines that will govern the current redistricting cycle. Public input - Public input hearings should occur after census data are released so that current demographics can be taken into account. (We would welcome public hearings this summer prior to census data release, but a substantial number covering the state should occur after release) - Public input hearings should be recorded and saved on LCRO's web site Committees shall provide for electronic submission of suggested maps and other written input including communities of interest definitions - Public hearings should allow for the discussion and submission of communities of interest data by Georgians Accountability - The committee shall provide a written responses to the communities of interest submissions and clearly indicate whether or not it was deemed applicable and why Release of information - Proposed maps must be released for public review via publicly accessible website. Maps should be downloadable files that do not require software for viewing - Legislature will release a list of all factors taken into account when developing redistricting plans - Legislature will release expected partisan lean of each district using last statewide election as a benchmark - Legislature will release analysis of how proposed maps affects the ability of communities of color and VRA-protected language minorities to elect candidates of their choice. - All plans and input provided to committee and/or committee staff (and LCRO) shall be released via publicly available website Hearing schedules and timeframes - Special session dates and rules should be announced at least one month in advance of convening - Hearings to consider redistricting bills must not take place sooner than two weeks after the proposed maps are released to the public, and not sooner than five days for changed maps - Hearings to consider redistricting bills must allow for virtual and remote participation, including citizen testimony, via video conference such that citizens from across the state have ample opportunity to participate Accessibility - Ensure language access as demonstrated by translating public facing materials into a minimum set of languages required to reach diverse Georgians (at least Spanish, Korean, Vietnamese, Mandarin/Cantonese, Hindi, Arabic). Also demonstrate language access by providing for interpretation where necessary and feasible to gain public input - Ensure the website is compliant with S.508 of US Rehabilitation Act, making it accessible to people with disabilities We recognize the challenge you face as leaders of the redistricting effort in this politically charged environment. With the delay in census data and extremely close 2020 elections, the pressure to produce fair maps will be intense and the time frame compressed. Nonetheless, Georgians deserve a redistricting process that instills confidence in the outcome. We would be happy to meet with your committees to discuss the 2021 redistricting guidelines and these provisions. Sincerely, 9to5 American Civil Liberties Union of Georgia All On the Line All Voting is Local-Georgia Asian Americans Advancing Justice-Atlanta Common Cause Georgia Fair Count Fair Districts GA Feminist Women's Health Center Georgia AFL-CIO Georgia NAACP League of Women Voters of Georgia New American Pathways Planned Parenthood Southeast Advocates Progress Georgia SPARK Reproductive Justice NOW!, Inc. SiX Action SPLC Action Fund The Peoples' Agenda Women Watch Afrika"

6/30/2021K. Doten-Snitker of Athens-Clarke County
"Districting in my city and county does not make any sense. I moved last year from one side of Athens to the other. All of my Georgia State Legislators are different people than at my former address, even though I live a lot closer to my old address to the middle of my new district. Why do the boundaries of three different House districts go through the middle of town? There's no way any representative can do a good job of paying attention to the concerns of people in my neighborhood and acting in our interests when that same representative also is responsible to people living the next county over in a completely different setting and community! The current districts make it difficult for elected officials to fulfill their democratic duties and their oaths to represent us. It undermines democracy. It's un-American."

6/30/2021P. Peterson of Athens-Clarke County
"My county should only consist of two, not three, state house districts. Also, my US Congressional District should include all of my county (Clarke), not just part of it."

6/30/2021H. Hallett of Fulton County
"These comments are a follow-up to the oral testimony that I provided at the Atlanta hearing on Monday June 28th. As I mentioned in my comments, it is a damning indictment on this process that recently defeated candidate Rich McCormick sent a fundraising email for his renewed bid for the 7th district Congressional seat in Georgia saying, ""Given (redistricting) is controlled by the Republicans it will likely result in a Republican-favored district."" The most common request I heard during the hearing is that the process be ""fair"". Dr. McCormick expects the exact opposite. And likely, he will be proven correct. The members of the committee have a vested interest NOT in protecting the will of the voters, but in protecting their incumbencies, and in helping their ""team"" win. Dr. McCormick is well aware of that and he is counting on the majority party members of this committee to be good ""teammates"". This sadly, is how this process has worked in the past. And you all are not likely to choose a better, more ""fair"" path; that would be a true profile in courage, but those are not common. Likely, the cycle of partisan redistricting will continue, and the committee will do it's best to nominally follow norms for transparency and allowing for public input, but in the end, the committee will redistrict to garner whatever advantages it can for the majority party. This same sentence could be written no matter what party is in power. The more democratic (small d) thing to do is to reform the process to take incumbent lawmakers out of the incongruous spot where they currently are. It makes absolutely no sense to allow the very people whose future depends upon redistricting to manage the process of redistricting. You all know this, but it's hard to give up that power when you are in control. It will be much easier when you are not in power, BUT you could be adults and do the right thing! Reform the process. Allow an independent commission to manage the process, preferably leaning heavily on academics and computer-driven models for drawing district lines. We all benefit when districts are not gerrymandered. Gerrymandering creates less competition and allows more polarizing candidates to win office. Once in office, they continue to be polarizing and don't often compromise, making governing ever harder. The public wants less gridlock and generally more moderate candidates. Do your duty, be a good steward of the faith that has been entrusted in you and be a part of the solution. Give up your power! You may be sad, but the citizens of Georgia will benefit. I leave you with the question....will you serve yourself or will you serve the citizens of Georgia. Rich McCormick thinks he knows the answer. Sadly, i do too, but you can always rise to the moment and do what is better for our state instead of playing some silly, endless game of cyclical power-grabbing."

6/30/2021R. Mullinax of Whitfield County
The U.S. Department of Agriculture is a wealth of information of not only water shed boundaries but of all sorts of economic data as related to districts and communities and regions with a well defined process for subdividing them into smaller districts. It would seem a waste of resources to ignore this database in the process of political redistricting.

6/30/2021T. Crawford of Fulton County
I want to see a FAIR reapportionment to our districts based solely on census numbers. This is not a football for political parties to garner more voters for one party or the other. We are all Georgians and we have the right to have them drawn on facts not for political purposes. Everyone has the right to a fair reapportionment.

6/30/2021P. McKibben of Glynn County
"Elections are made secure, transparent, and trustworthy because, at every step of the way, there is a balance between poll workers. At least one Republican and Democrat. Drawing new district lines should be the same balance. At the moment, I see there are 10 Republicans and only 5 Democrats on the redistricting committee. If you want Ga citizens to believe you can draw fair maps, then you MUST make the map drawing balanced. Other states appoint an odd number of Republicans and Democrats to their team drawing district maps. And the chair is a judge appointed by the States Supreme court. that way the Repubs and Dems have to work together to draw new maps."

6/30/2021D. Greenwood of Gwinnett County
"Dear Committee, I had the opportunity to attend the Redistricting Hearing in Cumming Georgia last evening. I did not speak but wish to share my comments via this medium. As a grandmother in Gwinnett County I am extremely concerned about the managment of the Gwinnett Public School System. My concern was rasised when the long-term superintendent Mr. Alvin Wilbanks was dismissed before the conclusion of his contract in July 2022. Mr. Wilbanks has a storied and celebrated tenure as the leader of Gwinnett Schools. Gwinnett School District is the 12th largest district in the nation, has 188,000 students and over 150 schools. The budget is 2.4 Billion yes I said Billion dollars and this does not includ the 300 million in Covid funding that is at the districts disposal. In the last 2 years 3 new Board Members were elected and the first act of this newly constituted School Board was to dismiss Mr. Wilbanks. He had annoucned he would not seek to work beyond July of 2022 and offered to support the efforts to find his replacement. What I can not discribe as anything more than a un-informed and venditicve move Mr. Wilbanks was fired. His removal was voted upon along party lines with the newly elected Democratic majorty forcing Mr. Wilbanks out. This act will cost the district over $500,000 dollars which demonstrates poor fiscal accounablity and disregard for taxpayer dollars. The act also shows a lack desire for a smooth and orderly management transition for one of the biggest jobs in the state of Georgia. This School Board is now being investigated by https://www.cognia.org Cognia due to parents concerns about this and other issues related to Board conduct. The Distict risks accediation because of the recent rash political acts by the Board. I seek to ask you to look closely at the prospect of increasing the number for Board Members from 5 - 7. Think of the power of 2.4 Billion dollars in the hands of a few citzens who may have policital activisam as a driver. By increaseing the number of Board members you will provide some additional and much needed oversight. Thank you for reviewing my comments as you conclude your important work for the citizens & children of Georiga and Gwinnett County."

6/30/2021D. Narron of Athens-Clarke County
"Splitting the Athens-Clarke County across multiple districts and combining us with very dissimilar populations in Oconee, Barrow, and Jackson counties is an effective way to ensure the people of Athens-Clarke county are underrepresented in both state and federal legislatures. This is an opportunity to make this right."

6/30/2021D. Sumner of DeKalb County
I urge you to have fair redistricting. It should be done by an independent commission always to prevent partisanship by either party. There should be open records and fair public input. Metro Atlanta only had one hearing but has the majority of the voters which doesn't seem fair. Please do the fair thing. Thank you.

6/30/2021V. Meek of Whitfield County
"My concern is that redrawing of the Georgia Congressional Districts might result in this county being in non-continquous communities. Eighty percent of the world's carpet and floor covering is manufactured within 65 miles of Dalton, Georgia. These large manufacturing companies employ tens of thousands of people who live in this county, surrounding counties, and even people who drive in from Tennessee & Alabama. The representative whose constituency is Whitfield County should not be in a re-configured district in which there are significant competing interests. For example, the old 9th district ran across the top of the state from NW GA to NE GA. Whitfield County was the largest county in the west, Hall County the largest in the east. As you know Hall County is the place where the largest chicken processing plants are located, and anyone representing Hall County would want agricultural bills to benefit Hall County. Whitfield County, on the other hand is a business manufacturing center and competing bills would benefit Whitfield County."

6/30/2021D. Denton of Fulton County
"Dear Members of the Committees, I have previously submitted written comment which I hope was incorporated into meeting records and included with other comments received from the public whether delivered live in-person or written. To those comments I would add the following: It is unrealistic and unfair to expect elected officials to endure the political pressures and temptations associated with redrawing district lines. The pressure is just too strong even in ""normal"" times, and in today's strongly divided political atmosphere, probably much, much worse. Please consider the creation of an independent redistricting commission charged by the Committees to manage this task. Thank you."

6/30/2021P. Gagne of Fulton County
"I will be looking to the media (especially AJC) for an evaluation of the fairness of the redistricting. If the same people are doing this who did the voter restrictions, I'm not expecting much. This is an issue that will determine my vote."

6/30/2021T. Krambier of Athens-Clarke County
"Splitting the Athens-Clarke County across multiple districts and thus combining us with very un-alike populations in Oconee, Barrow, and Jackson counties is an effective way to ensure the people of Athens-Clarke county are under-represented in both state and federal legislatures."

6/29/2021R. Hussmann of Floyd County
"Why can't the reapportionment be computed by a computer program? it is numerical information needed to balance the districts, and, a program could be written to include all variables."

6/29/2021B. Smith of Athens-Clarke County
"There is simply no good reason to have Athens Clarke county split across two congressional districts except to ensure that the people residing in Athens Clarke county are never able to have elected officials that represent their interests. The population here is politically, economically, educationally, culturally, and racially different than that of the surrounding counties, but our representatives only ever seem to represent our neighbors and never us. Please stop this gerrymandering!"

6/29/2021A. Wright-Cunniff of Coweta County
"I am writing to urge your support of an independent redistricting commission. An independent commission can be made up of an equal number of conservative and liberal voters and include voters who don't identify with either of the major parties. Given the fact that all Georgia voters are registered as independent, and no state voter belongs to a party in an official capacity, it makes sense that our districts should be objectively and fairly drawn rather than with party interests in mind. I would also rather see our legislators focus on governance that actually helps their constituents than squandering their time and energy on pointless exercises in tribal enmity. If my taxes help pay your salary, then surely I deserve a better return on my investment. Thank you."

6/29/2021C. Bruce of Athens-Clarke County
I do not support the Georgia legislature or other entity being able to overturn the future results of boards of elections. Audit certainly.

6/29/2021P. Reardon of Unknown County
"Good Afternoon, I start out by quoting The National Redistricting Foundation, in particular Marina Jenkins saying that the US Supreme Courts ruling in 2013 ruling (Shelby V Holder) opened the flood gates by removing Federal oversight to redistricting and in fact she stated this has led to the Georgia's new restrictive election law, She went on to say this signals what is to come using voter suppression in redistricting. I listened to the first online hearing and all I heard from the young community minority activists was don't change the lines it will dilute my vote. Let's get real and talk facts. Redistricting happens every 10 years in every state to make it 'FAIR' for equal representation in districts after the census. So p]� vote is not diluted. After or any time, you can find where you are by going to MVP/SOS or on your county BOE website. I am sure you will not slice and dice communities like prior Democrat majorities have done in this state. Which is it, dilute your vote by keeping your communities together or separate communities by bringing diversity? I am confused. I want diversity. It is a misconception that us `white' people do not want to lose control. What does that mean anyway? The left makes everything about racial or class problems. It is a huge assumption to view all minorities voting for one side over the other because most minorities have conservative values and many came from communist countries. So to look at this as a white vs minority thing for redistricting is destructive to the process. For many cycles the Democrats re drew the lines and I challenge you all to go look at that history. We had control 10 years ago and we have control now. The question on the census about citizenship was removed but should have been on left there because it always had been. Illegal people in this country should NOT be voting and SHOULD NOT be counted because they do not count here in America and need to go home to count and vote. In summary, elections have consequences, and I am sure you will do the RIGHT thing. The law and the Constitution are on your side. Thanks for your work."

6/29/2021C. Smith of Fulton County
"I'm truly disappointed that once again our Republican controlled State government is trying everything in their power to keep democrats from being heard. I find it strange that the meeting for oral comments in a Republican stronghold such as Forsyth are held in the evening when working people are able to attend, but the meeting for oral comments in Fulton County, a strong democratic community are on a Monday morning during working hours. How are we to trust you to redistricting our state when, as our representatives, you continually try to limit our involvement in the process. As a registered voter in the state of Georgia I firmly believe the redistricting process should be handled by non partisan group. Thank you for your time."

6/29/2021A. Hackett of Unknown County
"The schedule of the 1st meeting in Fulton Co. Monday morning was not accessible, people have to work, yet Forsyth Co is after work. Easier to comment in person. It does not show good faith."

6/29/2021E. Williams of Unknown County
"I want a truly fair and transparent process. The Redistricting committee should not allow any inkling of racial and partisan gerrymandering. Maps should be drawn to reflect the people, not the elected. We have had enough of partisan politics, partisan maps and partisan policies. Let's make Georgia an example for other states to follow by showing that we can rise above the demons that have plagued our state and our country."

6/29/2021D. Jackson of Unknown County

6/29/2021A. Ternak of Stephens County
"* Please use Compact districts as much as possible. *Communities of interest staying within the same district. *Stay Contiguous, whole counties being grouped together. *Corridors of transportation should be used to unite a district design. Don't try to rig, cheat, manipulate, or destroy districts. Or we will vote you out. Thanks sincerely."

6/29/2021S. Hastings of Forsyth County
Please keep Forsyth county all in either 7th district or 9th district.

6/29/2021K. Posten of Hall County
Hello. I just want to say that I want the Federal Government to stay OUT of our state when it comes to redistricting. Thank you.

6/29/2021M. Zuniga of Athens-Clarke County
"I support the reapportionment, 100%"

6/29/2021L. Hodgson of DeKalb County
"The current redistricting process unethically allows legislators to draw their own political boundaries and decide who they want as their constituents. Georgians need to know committee guidelines sooner rather than later. We need access to draft maps, shape files and all data well in advance of the special session. Act with integrity, not your incumbency."

6/29/2021B. Lappe of Fulton County
"I support a fair, non-partisan, and transparent redistricting process for Georgia. As a scientist, I support using modern technology and mathematical modeling to redistrict Georgia in a fair and unpolitical manner, and want to see the methods of how this process is conducted. A new mathematical method developed by Cornell researchers can inject fairness into the fraught process of political redistricting-and proves that it takes more than good intent to create a fair and representative district. There are many models that do similar work. I urge you to pilot one of these models and at least compare it to alternative options to see how far it deviates from an objective method."

6/29/2021M. Capps of Barrow County
"I am writing in direct reference to a situation my family and I are currently encountering. I am assisting my 70 year old Aunt with a domestic situation where she filed for divorce and had to proceed with an eviction and writ from the court to get her ex husband and ex step son out of the home. My issue concerns the ex step son. His name is Robert Forrest Tucker Jr. and if you look into him you will see that he is an excessive repeat offender of multiple crimes but mostly crimes of fraud and theft, or identity theft. He has been in and out of the jail system since 2007. In the last 5 years alone he has been sentenced to over 20 years for charges he was convicted of. However, due to our jails being over crowded and his crimes being non violent he is walking around a FREE man. FREE to squat in my Aunts house for over a year while doing class 1 drugs that were confiscated in our eviction, FREE to damage and destroy property in the house belonging to my Aunt, FREE to sell furniture and family heirlooms that were in the house that he had no ownership of and no authorization to sell, FREE to plan and research his next victims by having a binder of over 1000 names, social security numbers, and copies of licenses and credit cards, FREE to impersonate a veteran with a stolen set of Marine dress blues, and FREE to continue to commit fraud and theft by electronically stealing over six thousand dollars from my Aunt's bank account which we have had to file a report on and start the process of pressing charges. I am writing as someone who has been directly effected by this situation in hopes that our representatives can work together in somehow starting some type of reform. As a state we need to have some type of 3 strikes and you are out program even for non violent crimes. Victims of non violent crimes are no less important or traumatized than those of violent crimes. Though our scars are not physical, I can assure you the lasting effect of all this on my family will have emotional scars for years to come. There is no way that this man should be allowed to walk around a free man and continue to rack up victims in his destructive path. As a voting constituent I ask that you hear my voice and concern and work to make the change needed to protect victims of non violent crimes like my Aunt Doris Hollon. I would be honored and happy to work with you in anyway that I can to help make this a reality. I will speak to anyone who will listen and be glad to be a public advocate for this to raise awareness and action. Often times when situations happen to us we complain privately and hope for change but do nothing to facilitate this change. I am not one of those people. I would like to work with our elected representatives to create results that will benefit not only victims in our district, but in our entire state. I look forward to hearing from you and moving forward in whatever way necessary to help make the change needed for non violent repeat offenders. Thank you, Melissa Capps"

6/29/2021A. Starnes of DeKalb County
Please conduct an open and transparent process that accurately reflects the will of Georgians. There should be no racial or partisan gerrymandering in the new maps. Georgia is a fifty-fifty state and our representation should represent that.

6/29/2021R. Wells of Whitfield County
Leave things as they are stop trying to make things go your way. And the Republicans have the nerve to talk about election stealing when this is exactly the intend in redistricting.

6/29/2021G. Killeen of DeKalb County
"Let's stop the gerrymandering. I know that the Democrats did this when they were in power and it was wrong then and it's wrong now that the republicans are in power. I'm a moderate and I want to see more moderates in office. In many congressional races, the primary will determine who will be elected as the general won't be competitive. Let's end the polarization and get back to having more competitive general elections."

6/29/2021W. Barnett of Athens-Clarke County
"It is time to reunite Athens-Clarke County into one Congressional District and state district. Gerrymandering is wrong, no matter which party does it. The people of this county deserves better."

6/28/2021M. Gober of Fulton County
"I fully appreciate that redistricting is a difficult task, and I thank each of you on the Committee for your important work. To the extent possible, at least in the dense urban areas, for the State House of Representatives, I ask that you try to keep communities together. I have been in an urban divided district (House District 80) for ten years now. Much of my district is DeKalb County with a smaller portion being Fulton County. Much of the DeKalb side is the city of Brookhaven and its surrounding communities-while on the Fulton side there are a few city of Sandy Springs precincts. We are divided communities, cities, counties and school systems. Each side of this district has different issues and different needs. The DeKalb concerns are vastly different from the Fulton concerns. I would like for my Representative to be part of my community, my city, my county and have a personal vested interest in the success of my schools. Thank you for your consideration of this important issue."

6/28/2021B. Kramer of Fulton County
"This was my speech I gave at the Atlanta committee meeting on 6/28/2021. My name is Betsy Kramer, I am currently the Acting Chairman of Fulton County Republican Party. I'm an over thirty-year resident of the North Metro Area. I originally lived in Cobb, then Gwinnett, and for the past twenty-two years my home has been in Johns Creek in Fulton County. My family moved to Johns Creek before it was anticipated becoming a city. I currently reside in the 6th Congressional District and am very active in the community. I want to speak to you today about the future shape of the 6th Congressional District. There can be many possibilities, but only a few make sense to many of us who live here. My odds-on favorite possibility is for the 6th District to center around the GA 400 corridor. The GA 400 corridor in general has mutual interests and concerns on the development, work lives, recreation, and transportation - we are an identical community of interest. This corridor would encompass communities around GA 400, including South Forsyth County. South Forsyth is, like North Fulton, a newly, fastly growing area. When I first moved to Johns Creek, much of the city was undeveloped, as was Forsyth County. Our two county areas reflect the same interests. My proposal also retains the core of the existing 6th district, thus not radically changing the district, but bringing in more harmonious interests. It is a compact shape along the GA 400 corridor. In closing, my proposal for the reconfiguration of the 6th District is the best path forward for the Georgia General Assembly. Thank you for hearing me, and I look forward to the results of the hard task you have on your plate."

6/28/2021D. Denton of Fulton County
"Dear Members of the Georgia Legislative and Congressional Reapportionment Committees, Thank you for inviting public comment on the topic of reapportionment based on the 2020 census. I am a Georgia native and have lived most of my life here. I am a mother to two public high school students, I work full-time, and I was a pollworker in 2020. I appreciate the opportunity to engage here. To that end, I urge the Committees to please take steps to improve the transparency of this process for Georgians. Meetings: -Make public input meetings more numerous and include an online option for attendees. -Improve the notice of these meetings; this should be published in as many locations as possible, giving as much notice as possible. -Provide greater accessibility in recognition of our state's diversity of language, and an ASL interpreter for the deaf and hard-of-hearing. Transparency: -Define rules and metrics before drafting the first map revisions. Publish this information at minimum on your state government website. Include this information when posting meeting notices. -Publish the draft maps for public review and comment. Clearly state how you will consider input from Georgia voters in the subsequent drafts. Process and outcome: -Consider impacts to public education, public transit, and other shared resources when choosing how our congressional representatives' districts will be apportioned. -Consider impacts of splitting communities, in particular in their ability to make their voices heard to their elected officials. -Take steps to ensure districts are competitive to the greatest extent possible. Candidates sure of their election because of district lines do not listen to their constituents. Please ensure that our voices remain relevant to them; they should remember that they must earn our vote. Change is sometimes difficult but opposing change does not prevent it from occurring. Georgia will benefit the most from a government that accurately reflects its current constituencies. The diversity we will see reflected in the census data is not well-represented in current state public offices. And the 2020 election results showed that Georgia is not as homogenous politically as it previously appeared. What if that past homogeneity was based on inaccurate (intentional or unintentional) premises related to the current maps? The nation is watching Georgia to see how we, a state that recently passed one of the most restrictive new voting ""reform"" laws, will manage this process. Current and future Georgia voters are watching, too. You have critical responsibility here and you may feel that no matter how the lines are drawn, some of Georgia's current and future voters will view the decisions very negatively. That is unfortunately true. Additionally, some of our citizenry seem to have lost faith in America's democratic integrity, even with data demonstrating the strong security of 2020's elections and no evidence of widespread fraud. We must (re)build the trust and give all Georgia voters evidence-based reasons to feel confident in our democratic process. Please ensure your approach to the reapportionment process does all that it can to support that confidence. Thank you."

6/28/2021J. Brooks of Fulton County
"My neighborhood (downtown Atlanta) is split among 3 different State House Districts. This is divisive and cumbersome. Let's keep all of Downtown Atlanta in one district because we all share the same priorities and needs...we don't want to be pitted against our neighbors, we want unity as a neighborhood. Please put all of downtown in the same district. Thank you."

6/28/2021J. Syed of Forsyth County
Georgia turned blue after 30 years. The citizens have spoken. It is time for the GA legislative body to serve their constituents and not themselves. The world is watching. Georgians are watching. Redistrict to give people a voice and not to increase your parties seat. Use an independent commission and have public hearings at all diverse high population locations

6/28/2021R. Drummer of Fulton County

6/28/2021C. of Unknown County
Redistributing should be a non partisan process - gerrymandering is deeply harmful to our democracy and will produce results that are not truly representative of the views of Georgians

6/28/2021J. Syed of Forsyth County
Georgia turned blue after 30 years. The citizens have spoken. It is time for the GA legislative body to serve their constituents and not themselves. The world is watching. Georgians are watching. Redistrict to give people a voice and not to increase your parties seat. Use an independent commission and have public hearings at all diverse high population locations

6/28/2021C. Battles of Fulton County
"Redistricting Testimony for June 28th Introduction. History shows us that gerrymandering is a tool that has been used by both Democrats and Republicans to dilute Georgian's power to choose their elected official. The vote is Georgians' voice and both parties are guilty of muzzling that voice in the name of gaining or retaining power. Previously we had section 5 of the Voting Rights Act to push against egregious attempts to dilute our vote. Unfortunately, section 5 was dismantled by the US Supreme Court and therefore, there is no law to make sure maps are drawn that empower all Georgians' voices at the ballot box. We must rely on your integrity to do so. Because of that, this process should be as transparent and non-partisan as possible. We have seen past decisions in the redistricting process dilute the power of certain communities to choose legislators that best represent them. While the letter of Section 2 of the VRA has been adhered to in creating majority-minority districts, those districts have also been used to avoid creating opportunity districts. Communities of interest have been divided. Mid-cycle changes to district lines made to protect incumbents. The people of Georgia have reasons not to trust this process. If SB 202 was passed to ""restore voter confidence"", which it did not, then the redistricting process should be conducted in a way that also restores voter confidence, particularly Black and brown voters who have seen decisions made that (deliberately or not) impact their ability to cast a ballot or believe their vote counts, regardless of whether the majority party likes the way they vote. At this point, we have seen these public meetings convened before we have seen the data or draft maps. And while we understand the delays caused by COVID-19, it should also be noted there is only one public meeting in the metro area and that it is in one of the smallest venues announced so far. Gwinnett County does not have a meeting scheduled at all despite having a large and diverse population. And, for some reason, meetings that were scheduled to be held in other cities with larger, more diverse populations were moved to smaller communities such as the Augusta meeting being held in Martinez, which is at least 20 minutes away. During the last meeting on June 15th, people were advised they could not attend in person as the meeting was virtual only. Yet, Chairman Kennedy gave the public that were present the opportunity to speak which gave the impression that the public had chosen not to be present. Again, all of this might be unconscious and not deliberate at all. But since we must rely on your integrity, we ask you to make sure to avoid even the appearance of deliberate partisan politics in the redistricting process. Partisan gerrymandering may not be illegal, but it is unethical. And if it is this legislative body's goal to restore voter confidence, they should be working to restore the voter confidence of all Georgians. Thank you."

6/28/2021J. Robinson of Fulton County
"The recent voter suppression policies enacted by our governor without input from Georgia citizens or our representatives are Constitutionally unacceptable. It is imperative that redistricting and reapportionment be executed in the most publicly transparent way possible. Any Georgia citizen should be able to recreate the math behind each decision made. Citizens should also have input at every step of the process, and the power to audit each step. Racial gerrymandering and Jim Crow has been the norm in Georgia for more than a century, and now we have the power to turn that around. Particular attention should be paid to representation of Atlanta's Black and minority communities, and their voices prioritized. Transparency is essential to ensure enfranchisement and representation for everyone. Now is the time to move forward and expand, not contract, justice."

6/28/2021J. Herndon of DeKalb County
"The districting that divides cities such that they have no real representation is a shame to the democratic views of those people. Decatur, for instance, has multiple House representatives and none of them have more than 10% of their votes from the city. Given the significance of local agenda House votes on issues that impact the population, it should be a priority to have a representative that doesn't so easily ignore the votes & opinions of a city in Atlanta. In conclusion, any drawing of districts in which a homogenous group, or city has their house votes divided it is problematic."

6/28/2021C. Folsom of Johnson County
We CAN would like to respectfully ask that tiny towns like ours not be distracted with larger counties. We feel as if we have to compete with larger counties for resources and funding. This often leaves smaller towns with very little support.

6/28/2021W. Knowles of Fulton County
"This is to encourage the committee to draw balanced districts and avoid gerrymandering. It is clear that gerrymandering leads too extreme candidates on both sides. Georgia limits participation by independents so their is no way to offset the problems created by lopsided party votes where a small minority percentage of Georgians can sway electoral results. Balanced districts have community in common and result in balanced representation, generally without regard to party politics."

6/28/2021L. McKinney of Fulton County
Reapportionment should be done by independent team or a bipartisan team.

6/28/2021S. of Decatur County
How do you plan to breakup a zip code and is that legal. And with this redistricting will the school districts be affected and inclusive.

6/28/2021K. Thieme of Unknown County
Fair non partisan maps are crucial to protecting our vote and our democracy.

6/28/2021L. Reif of Fulton County
I am very much opposed to any redistricting that will limit my representation in Congress. I have lived in district 06 for 24 years and Lucy McBath is my Congressperson. I voted for her and I believe partisan redistricting needs to end. This is totally un-democratic & un- American.

6/28/2021D. Jaggi of DeKalb County
"Every day I see patients whose lives are affected by our state's legislation. Each of their voices should be allowed to be heard for the sake of their community. I urge you to create districts that comply with the US Constitution, the Voting Rights act of 1965, and create districts that are geographically contiguous. Districts should provide racial and language minorities with an equal opportunity to participate in the political process. The redistricting plan should not, when considered on a statewide basis, unduly favor or disfavor any political party."

6/28/2021K. Kessler of Fulton County
"I urge the Joint Apportionment Committee to preserve communities of interest such as my neighborhood, Downtown Atlanta. My neighborhood is split into 3 different state house districts. State House District 57, portions of which are just 4 blocks wide. Another example: the State Capitol is my district, but Liberty Plaza - directly across the street - is in District 58. I would like the Committee to pay particular attention in the City of Atlanta to neighborhood and Neighborhood Planning Unit (NPU) boundaries when drawing the new district maps so neighborhoods such as mine can stay together."

6/28/2021L. Netto of Fulton County
"It is always been the pure and simple beauty of American democracy that makes me so proud to call these United States home. Our Founding Fathers created a country that was not perfect but would strive to be so. The only way it could be better was the continued strength of American equiy and democracy, ideals that are increasingly relevant today. Members of the General Assembly, you have the chance to promote democracy, regardless of the ideology of the electorate bing against your own, regardless of the own personal wins you have to gain, regardless of the ulterior motives of those wishing to manipulate our beautiful democracy. Assemblymembers, you swore an oath to fight for the prosperity and interests of Georgia. An overwhelming majority of Americans and Georgians support limits on the partisan gerrymandering that ruins our democracy. Act and vote and lobby for the interests of Georgians and not those who want to redraw our state into a messed-up jigsaw to ensure victory for political parties rather than democracy as a whole. Ensure fairness for Georgians and not success for partisan interests. Thank you."

6/28/2021Y. Whyte of Unknown County
Want you to adopt fair representative maps. Avoid gerrymandering.

6/28/2021M. Breen of Fulton County
"I am urging that reapportionment be accomplished so that it is fair, transparent to your constituents, and solves the issues that the current, crazily drawn district lines cause. I live in Morningside Lenox Park where I formerly served on the Board of our neighborhood association. My home is in Georgia House District 57 and Senate District 36. I volunteer at one of my neighborhood parks that is a short walk away, but it is in HD 83, and SD 42. Our neighborhood is all within the City of Atlanta, NPU-F, yet we span 2 separate state house and senate districts. Whenever we have issues that require assistance from our state representatives, it entails coordinating the schedules of 2 representatives, 2 senators, and our volunteers. There is not a doodle poll out there that can find a common meeting time for that many people. And that's just my problem--the districts make running for office unnecessarily costly as candidates must travel across MANY disparate neighborhoods through Atlanta traffic. I believe Georgia can do better. I visited the capitol several times in 2016-2018 and attended hearings to urge the Georgia House and Senate to pass bills to create a fair district maps that do not dilute partisan votes. I was sorely disappointed that no action was taken after hours of testimony supporting a better way through legislation. This leaves us with no choice but to urge you to consider your conscious as you work on reapportionment and allow light to shine on the process so that we can once again, place some trust in our elected officials."

6/28/2021J. Navarre-Jones of DeKalb County
"It is the responsibility of the Reapportionment Committees to create fair, competitive districts. Competitive districts ensure that Georgia voters pick their representatives, and not the other way around. People seeking office must win the argument with the voters rather than relying on unfairly drawn districts that dilute certain groups' power."

6/28/2021A. Silverman of DeKalb County
"""Communities of interest"" should be kept intact in the process of drawing District lines in my opinion. This means neighborhoods, towns and cities. Probably with the 1990 census, my neighborhood was split into more than one House district and that has continued. I think we should have the same House rep just as we have the same state Senator. I find it hard to understand why a Georgia rep would represent pieces of several counties! I know that Georgia has (too) many counties but still. Drawing the lines has to satisfy a number of criteria I know but it should still be possible to keep communities of interest intact. Fairness should be the over-riding goal. And I ask that this time the House and Senate committees do the drawing in a transparent manner. Ideally, an independent citizens committee should be doing the drawing of district lines as in other places in the country."

6/28/2021S. Lee of DeKalb County
I am a resident of Stonecrest and at this time we do not have a representative for the City of Stonecrest. Emanual Jones represents less than 10% of Stonecrest and Darshawn Kendricks represents 1 block. This leaves 91.9% of Stonecrest unrepresented. Please draw the new reapportionment area so Stonecrest is represented 100%. I am not asking for a specific party to represent Stonecrest; I am asking for Stonecrest residents to have a representative to have a 100% stake in our city. Thank you.

6/28/2021M. Skeen of DeKalb County
"To the Georgia Senate & House Redistricting Committees: I have lived in DeKalb County since 1969 and have owned my home there for 48 years. I am a regular voter in all elections and have been a poll worker for the past 5 years. My preference for redistricting would be for an independent non-partisan panel to conduct the analysis of census data and propose redistricting maps. Since that would be impossible to implement within the current time frame, I urge you to make sure the redistricting process you about to undertake is fair and impartial and not based on partisan politics. I ask you to adopt guidelines for redistricting that improve public access, public participation and provide more opportunity for timely public comment. The redistricting process must inspire trust and confidence from all citizens whether Republican or Democrat. A major issue for me is transparency. Unfortunately, In the past, the bulk of the redistricting work has taken place behind closed doors with only minimal public involvement and disclosure. I strongly urge that you waive any secrecy provisions during all reapportionment deliberations by the General Assembly. Furthermore, Georgia has almost no laws guiding the development of redistricting plans. It is important to me that information released for proposed plans is extensive and timely enough to allow citizens to comment or advocate for changes before votes are taken in the special legislative session. I also concur with others who have offered the following specific provisions for the guidelines that will govern the current redistricting cycle. * Public input hearings should occur after census data are released so that current demographics can be taken into account. * Public input hearings should be recorded and saved on LCRO's web site * Committees shall provide for electronic submission of suggested maps and other written input including communities of interest definitions * Public hearings should allow for the discussion and submission of communities of interest data * The committee shall provide written responses to the communities of interest submissions and clearly indicate whether or not it was deemed applicable and why * Proposed maps should be released for public review via publicly accessible website. Maps should be downloadable files that do not require software for viewing * Legislature should release a list of all factors taken into account when developing redistricting plans * Legislature should release expected partisan lean of each district using last statewide election as a benchmark * Legislature should release analysis of how proposed maps affect the ability of communities of color and VRA-protected language minorities to elect candidates of their choice. * All plans and input provided to committee and/or committee staff (and LCRO) shall be released via publicly available website * Special session dates and rules should be announced at least one month in advance of convening * Hearings to consider redistricting bills must not take place sooner than two weeks after the proposed maps are released to the public, and not sooner than five days for changed maps * Hearings to consider redistricting bills must allow for virtual and remote participation, including citizen testimony, via video conference such that citizens from across the state have ample opportunity to participate * Ensure language access as demonstrated by translating public facing materials into a minimum set of languages required to reach diverse Georgians. Also demonstrate language access by providing for interpretation where necessary and feasible to gain public input. * Ensure the website is compliant with S.508 of US Rehabilitation Act, making it accessible to people with disabilities Georgians deserve a redistricting process that instills confidence in the outcome. I recognize the challenge you face as leaders of the redistricting effort in this politically charged environment. With the delay in census data and extremely close 2020 elections, the pressure to produce fair maps will be intense and the time frame compressed. I hope you will take these comments to heart and make this a fair and equitable process for all Georgians."

6/28/2021H. Prausnitz-Weinbaum of Fulton County
"Districts should be assigned fairly and without any particular agenda, and this reapportionment process should be nonpartisan. It is undemocratic and unfair to the state's residents to include partisan thinking in this process."

6/28/2021S. Prausnitz-Weinbaum of Fulton County
"As a future Georgia voter, I would like to make a plea for fair and nonpartisan redistricting. I have grown up during an increasingly partisan and politically polarized time. I hope the current redistricting opportunity can be the beginning of the end of the terrible political tribalism of the recent past and the beginning of an era of political healing, civil and informed discourse, and respect for the right of all voices to be heard."

6/28/2021M. Prausnitz of Fulton County
"In this highly partisan time, it is important that redistricting be done in a nonpartisan manner. The legislature should appoint a truly nonpartisan committee that uses unbiased methods to redistrict by community, not by gerrymandering."

6/28/2021C. Weinbaum of Fulton County
"Redistricting should be a fair and nonpartisan process, not one where the party with the current legislative majority schemes and finagles to ensure that the people are not proportionately represented. Please redistrict with fair and proportionate representation being the goal."

6/28/2021M. HAYMAN of DeKalb County
"I am a retired attorney and have resided in the City of Decatur for more than 30 years. I have participated in many election campaigns. In the past, both Georgia Republicans and Democrats have made redistricting a secretive process. Redistricting should be a public and transparent process with rules requiring prompt and timely disclosure of all legislative committee work--all data, algorithms and maps--in order to provide opportunities for meaningful public input. In addition to the current hearings, public input hearings with virtual participation opportunities should be scheduled after the new census data is released. All data and proposed maps should be available on publicly accessible websites at least two weeks before those hearings. These public input hearings must be scheduled well in advance of the legislature's special session and hearings to consider and vote on the actual redistricting bills. It is also essential that the legislature's redistricting committees adopt and publicize objective benchmarks for drawing maps and that those committees commit to meeting those benchmarks. Only with such a transparent process using objective benchmarks will Georgia redistricting's process insure adequate representation of minorities, of communities of interest, and of all its citizens so that every vote counts. Please make this statement part of the public record for the hearing scheduled today, June 28, 2021. Thank you for your consideration."

6/28/2021J. Arthurton of Fulton County
A few states have independent commissions producing the maps for districts. I don't understand why all states do not use independent commissions. The State of Georgia should stop having politicians of either party drawing the lines every ten years. Thank you.

6/28/2021J. Geierman of DeKalb County
"My name is Joseph Geierman. I have lived in Doraville since 2001, and have been involved in the community in various capacities since that time. I currently serve as Doraville's mayor. As someone who is engaged in the community, I would like to make sure that Doraville is grouped into districts that make sense, and that the voices of the people who live here are not drowned out. The Buford Highway Corridor runs through our city, and there are many people who live all along the corridor who do not speak English as a first language. I think it makes sense for you to consider these parts of Doraville, Chamblee and Brookhaven together. I also think that other portions of our city have strong historic connections with Dunwoody - along Winters Chapel Rd and Tilly Mill Rd. It also makes sense to have these communities grouped together. I would also say that there is some chance the city may not be properly represented if it is too divided among different districts. I encourage you to keep our city together in the redistricting process to ensure our citizens' voices don't get diluted. Thank you."

6/28/2021J. Williamson of Athens-Clarke County

6/27/2021N. Nethery of DeKalb County
"I am very concerned that this year's redistricting process be transparent and fair. Public comment should be solicited throughout the process. A non-partisan, independent commission should be appointed to draw the maps. No backroom deals -- our public servants need to represent all our voices."

6/27/2021M. Allen of Pickens County
"""Gerrymandering"" has sabotaged voting since before the term was coined. As an American citizen, I deeply resent the practice, performed with remorseless efficiency in Georgia. The election of Rep Greene is The Last Straw. Please take politics OUT of designating districts! Live up to America's creed and make every vote count, please."

6/27/2021C. Kirk of Whitfield County
"Surely with technology available to us, the congressional districts could be figured out with COUNTIES STAYING WHOLE. In my opinion, having districts with only whole counties would decrease Gerrymandering issues from any party. It might make the districts population range higher than what is possible with Gerrymandering, but I think the range could be reasonable. Definitely worth the elimination of drawing lines around neighborhoods within counties!!!"

6/27/2021S. Rose of DeKalb County
"To the Georgia Senate & House Redistricting Committees: I am a 48-year citizen of Georgia, living in DeKalb County, where I have owned my home for 28 years. I am a regular voter in all elections and urge you to make sure the redistricting process you about to undertake is fair and impartial and not based on partisan politics. I ask you to adopt guidelines for redistricting that improve public access, public participation and provide more opportunity for timely public comment. The redistricting process must inspire trust and confidence from all citizens whether Republican or Democrat. Unfortunately, In the past, the bulk of the redistricting work has taken place behind closed doors with only minimal public involvement and disclosure. As the law now stands, all legislative communications with the LCRO are by statute deemed legally confidential communications. In addition, both the Open Records and Open Meetings Acts do not apply to the General Assembly. I urge that you waive those secrecy provisions during all reapportionment deliberations by the General Assembly. Furthermore, Georgia has almost no laws guiding the development of redistricting plans. It is important to me that information released for proposed plans is extensive and timely enough to allow citizens to comment or advocate for changes before votes are taken in the special legislative session. In addition to a general waiver of the secrecy provisions noted above, I concur with others who have offered the following provisions for the guidelines that will govern the current redistricting cycle. * Public input hearings should occur after census data are released so that current demographics can be taken into account. * Public input hearings should be recorded and saved on LCRO's web site * Committees shall provide for electronic submission of suggested maps and other written input including communities of interest definitions * Public hearings should allow for the discussion and submission of communities of interest data * The committee shall provide written responses to the communities of interest submissions and clearly indicate whether or not it was deemed applicable and why * Proposed maps should be released for public review via publicly accessible website. Maps should be downloadable files that do not require software for viewing * Legislature should release a list of all factors taken into account when developing redistricting plans * Legislature should release expected partisan lean of each district using last statewide election as a benchmark * Legislature should release analysis of how proposed maps affect the ability of communities of color and VRA-protected language minorities to elect candidates of their choice. * All plans and input provided to committee and/or committee staff (and LCRO) shall be released via publicly available website * Special session dates and rules should be announced at least one month in advance of convening * Hearings to consider redistricting bills must not take place sooner than two weeks after the proposed maps are released to the public, and not sooner than five days for changed maps * Hearings to consider redistricting bills must allow for virtual and remote participation, including citizen testimony, via video conference such that citizens from across the state have ample opportunity to participate * Ensure language access as demonstrated by translating public facing materials into a minimum set of languages required to reach diverse Georgians. Also demonstrate language access by providing for interpretation where necessary and feasible to gain public input. * Ensure the website is compliant with S.508 of US Rehabilitation Act, making it accessible to people with disabilities Georgians deserve a redistricting process that instills confidence in the outcome. I recognize the challenge you face as leaders of the redistricting effort in this politically charged environment. With the delay in census data and extremely close 2020 elections, the pressure to produce fair maps will be intense and the time frame compressed. I hope you will take these comments to heart and make this a fair and equitable process for all Georgians."

6/27/2021F. Dykes of DeKalb County
"Redistricting must ban partisan gerrymandering of congressional districts. There should be an independent redistricting commission that completes the task, rather than partisans in the legislature. By establishing uniform rules, neither party would be able to manipulate the process. Creation of bizarrely shaped districts should be banned."

6/27/2021T. Payer of Unknown County
How anybody does NOT get fired over this is beyond me. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FR-DWou1QXc

6/26/2021R. Clarke of Fulton County
"I am a Georgia native and have lived in Atlanta for the last forty years. Georgia citizens, like all Americans, deserve to have their votes counted in a fair manner. When the legislature draws district lines, the majority party usually tries to draw districts that benefit their party, called gerrymandering in its worst manifestation. To draw districts that are not biased as to political party, race, ethnicity, or gender, I propose that Georgia establish a commission that balances political interests. The commission proposed in SR20 would be better balanced if each political party had, perhaps three members, and if there were five nonpolitical members. The commission should learn from other states' balanced approaches to redistricting. One suggestion I have is that Georgia's counties and cities not be divided between districts, except where the county or city has a larger population than is planned for each district. Such a county or city should be divided among as few districts as possible. The commission should create compact, contiguous districts. When the commission has reached a satisfactory map for districts, it should evaluate the distribution of voters by race and ethnicity, to be sure it is balanced. The commission should submit their work to the public for feedback, as proposed in SR20. Further, Georgia should arrange that each congressional district's vote in the electoral college will go to the presidential candidate winning that district's vote. The two Senate votes should go to the presidential candidate who gained the most votes statewide."

6/26/2021C. Barber of Gilmer County

6/26/2021R. Barnes of DeKalb County
"I am hoping the GA legislature will stop wasting taxpayer money fighting lawsuits levied against the voter suppressive laws they have passed. I'm hoping that they will be more fiscally responsible and work to pass non- partisan redistricting measures. If not, I am ready to throw my advocacy and dollars and vote behind the organizations working to make sure every Georgian is fairly represented and each of our votes count."

6/25/2021S. Moses of Decatur County
"ger*ry*man*der /?jer??mand?r/ Learn to pronounce verb gerund or present participle: gerrymandering manipulate the boundaries of (an electoral constituency) so as to favor one party or class. achieve (a result) by manipulating the boundaries of an electoral constituency. ""a total freedom to gerrymander the results they want"" If you cannot win an election w/o this, you should not be in office."

"6/25/2021H. Franklin, Jr. of Fulton County"
"The Honorable Senator John Kennedy Co-Chair Joint Legislative and Congressional Reapportionment Committee 421-D State Capitol Atlanta, GA 30334 Email: john.kennedy@senate.ga.gov The Honorable Representative Bonnie Rich, Co-Chair Joint Legislative and Congressional Reapportionment Committee 402 CLOB 18 Capitol Square Atlanta, GA 30334 Email: bonnie.rich@house.ga.gov Dear Senator Kennedy, Representative Rich and Members of the Joint Legislative and Congressional Reapportionment Committee: My name is Harold Franklin, Jr. I am a native Georgian, having spent my younger years residing in Southwest Atlanta before moving to Smyrna Georgia later in my life. I obtained my Bachelor of Arts degree in Economics from Emory University and later obtained a J.D. degree from the Georgia State University Law School in 1999. I have been involved in pro bono work which has focused on voting rights for the last 20 years. I am the chair of Georgia Election Protection Coalition through the Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights Under Law, a non-partisan organization that works to prevent disenfranchisement and voter suppression. In addition, I am the Southeast Regional Vice Chair on the Lawyers' Committee's Board of Directors. I also had the opportunity to work with the late Congressman John Lewis on voting rights protection. As a society, we should all agree that there is nothing partisan about ensuring that everyone who is eligible and registered to vote should be able to vote; that their votes will be counted; that Black voters and other voters of color should have an equal opportunity to elect candidates of their choice and that they should not be denied this equal opportunity due to redistricting plans that dilute their voting strength or intentionally discriminate against them based upon race, ethnicity or status as a member of a language minority group. To this end and to help ensure transparency and a fair redistricting process, the Lawyers' Committee and I respectfully request that the Joint Committee take into consideration the Lawyers' Committee's recent report discussing the changing demographics of the Georgia electorate and growing participation of Black voters and other voters of color in Georgia elections, entitled, The Central Role of Racial Demographics in Georgia Elections - How Race Affects Elections for the Georgia General Assembly. This report raises concerns that the 2021-2022 redistricting cycle will see more efforts by the majority party in the General Assembly to unconstitutionally racially gerrymander districts and to dilute minority voting strength to retain their tenuous control of the state legislature. The Lawyers' Committee's report is available at this link: https://lawyerscommittee.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/Final_Georgia-Redistricting-Report-1-1.pdf These concerns are warranted, particularly in this redistricting cycle. In past redistricting cycles following the release of the decennial Census data, Georgia was a covered jurisdiction under the preclearance provisions of Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, (""VRA""), meaning that state, Congressional and local redistricting plans had to be submitted for review to the Department of Justice to determine whether the plans discriminated against Black voters or other voters of color or retrogressed their ability to elect candidates of their choice. Even with the preclearance provisions of Section 5 of the VRA in place, the redistricting process in Georgia was not transparent and led to the adoption of redistricting plans which had the purpose or effect of diluting the voting strength of Black voters and other voters of color or which were racial gerrymanders that intentionally discriminated against Black voters or other voters of color to achieve the partisan result of Republicans maintaining majority control of state and Congressional legislative districts, statewide offices and many local Boards of County Commissioners, School Boards, City Councils and other local governmental bodies. Following the Supreme Court's decision in Shelby County v. Holder, 570 U.S. 529, 133 S. Ct. 2612 (June 25, 2013), which gutted the preclearance provisions of Section 5 of the VRA, the Georgia General Assembly made efforts to redistrict certain state legislative districts mid-decade in ways that diluted Black voting strength or intentionally discriminated against Black voters. For example, during the 2015 legislative session, the Georgia General Assembly passed House Bill 566, which included redistricting plans for House Districts 105 and 111 when the racial demographics of those districts were changing with increasing percentages of minority population. Governor Deal signed the redistricting plans into law on May 12, 2015. [Footnote 1] The Georgia State Conference of the NAACP, along with individual voters in Districts 105 and 111, filed a lawsuit challenging those redistricting plans as unconstitutional racial gerrymanders. [Footnote 2] The Plaintiffs filed a motion for preliminary injunction to enjoin elections under the gerrymandered plans. Although the three-judge panel in the case denied the Plaintiffs' motion finding that it fell short of meeting the high threshold for obtaining preliminary injunctive relief, the majority of the three-judge District Court panel found that the Plaintiffs' evidence that race predominated the redistricting process to be ""compelling"" and noted that the whole idea of redistricting House Districts 105 and 111 arose amidst talk about the changing demographics in Gwinnett and Henry Counties. [Footnote 3] The District Court's majority panel decision also highlighted an email noting that the redistricting plan reduced the percentage of Black population in House District 105 by two percentage points, which the stakeholders considered to mean they had accomplished their goal. [Footnote 4] In the wake of Hillary Clinton winning eight of ten counties in the Metro Atlanta area in the 2016 presidential contest, Republican members of the Georgia House of Representatives introduced HB 515 during the 2017 legislative session - only three months after the November 2016 presidential election - which sought to strengthen two Republican Metro Atlanta districts which had become more competitive for Democrats by incrementally decreasing the Black population in those districts. After this effort to racially gerrymander these House districts received local and national media attention [Footnote 5] and opposition from individual voters, civic engagement and voting rights experts, the proposed redistricting of the two House districts in HB 515 was eventually withdrawn. Given the history of unconstitutional racial gerrymandering and efforts to dilute the voting strength of Black voters and other voters of color by white Republicans in the Georgia General Assembly, I am very concerned about the potential for a repeat of these tactics during the 2021-2022 redistricting cycle in Georgia. To ensure fair maps are drawn that protect the right of Black voters and other voters of color to have an equal opportunity to elect candidates of their choice, I and the Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights Under Law urge the Joint Committee on Legislative and Congressional Reapportionment to make the process a transparent one, provide Georgians with information about the map-drawing process in a timely manner, conduct the map-drawing in public facing way and not solely behind the closed doors of the Legislative and Congressional Reapportionment Office, permit robust public participation in the map-drawing process, and to make a conscious and sincere effort to comply with the VRA and Constitution instead of paying lip-service to these principles so that voters are able to elect candidates of their choice instead of lawmakers manipulating redistricting plans to choose their voters. Thank you for your attention and consideration in this matter. Harold Franklin Southeast Regional Vice Chair Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights Under Law Footnotes: 1. See, legislative history of Georgia HB 566 (2015) on the Georgia General Assembly's website: https://www.legis.ga.gov/legislation/44463. 2. See, Georgia State Conf. of NAACP v. Georgia, 312 F. Supp. 3d 1357 (N.D. Ga. 2018). 3. Georgia State Conf. of NAACP, supra at 312 F. Supp. 3d 1364-65. 4. Id. at 312 F. Supp. 3d 1365. 5. See, e.g., Mark Joseph Stern, Georgia Republicans Pass Racial Gerrymander to Kick Black Voters Out of GOP Districts, Slate, March 7, 2017; Kristina Torres, House Republicans back off redrawing some district lines in Georgia, Atlanta Journal Constitution, March 24, 2017, available at: https://www.ajc.com/news/state--regional-govt--politics/house-republicans-back-off-redrawing-some-district-lines-georgia/v0mnaGrqeudZIhOt0WZXlN/"

6/25/2021B. Herndon of DeKalb County
Will Candidates residency requirements be waived because redistricting is taking so long because of the pandemic?

6/25/2021C. Jones of DeKalb County
"Georgia has never been fair in redistricting due to racism, we expect our Government to do the right thing and follow the laws of fairness when redrawing Georgia map. The people of Georgia are paying close attention to what is being done during this process and promise to hold those accountable when the laws are not followed."

6/25/2021R. Elliott of Fulton County
"Democrats have made inroads into Georgia with a strong ground game and an activist group. Republicans must respond. I ask the GAGOP to focus attention on building networks for identifying local office candidates, developing affirmative messages and countering Democrat messages in our neighborhoods."

6/24/2021A. Biancardi of Cherokee County
Please leave my district as is. We moved to Cherokee County for who represents us and what is important to us. Our family trusts our local representatives and do not agree or want any changes. Thank you.

6/24/2021A. YGUADO of Forsyth County
Do not be so concerned about winning as to providing a balance correct represenative view of the voting public.

6/24/2021V. Holmes of Fayette County
"My county, Fayette, was gerrymandered several years ago, resulting in a portion of the county, in which I live, becoming part of Congressional District 13, a District which consists of Douglas and parts of 5 counties, including a sliver of Fayette. The remainder of the Fayette is Congressional District 3. I hope that consideration will be given to reinstating the portion of Fayette County which is now District 13, to be reunited with District 3. As it stands now, our portion of District 13 has almost no representation from our Congressman David Scott, and any correspondence we have with him is basically ignored, although ""answered"" with boilerplate responses. We are much more aligned with Drew Ferguson, the Congressman from District 3, as we are much more conservative than the remainder of District 13. Please reunite Fayette County to become District 3 so our voices can be heard."

6/24/2021K. Smith of Whitfield County
"Without regard to which party controls a state legislature, leaving redistricting in the hands of the legislature can never inspire confidence that the process will be fair. No matter what process is adopted there will always be room for doubt. However, having done some research in how the matter is handled across the country, the process described in the California Constitution Article XXI seems a reasonable attempt to assuage such doubt."

6/23/2021L. Levitt of Cobb County
Redistricting by politicians should be illegal as should politicians controlling elections. If allowed to be done as usual every district will be more gerrymandered and Democratic voters will be even more eliminated from having a vote that matters. An independent commission of non political people should do the redistricting and stop the supression of Democratic voters. having one party with so much power just leads to more and more corruption. Please stop the corruption and make redistricting fair and balanced.

6/23/2021E. Shackelford of DeKalb County
"Stop the secrecy around redistricting work. The work of redistricting should be done in full view of the public. Adopt rules that require complete, timely disclosure of all work. Data, algorithms, and maps should be released in time for public review and comment, well in advance of legislative votes. Establish nonpartisan, objective benchmarks for the mapping of voting districts. Use standards for partisan balance and minority representation. Support and abide by the Democracy Act, which provides transparency, standards, and an independent citizen redistricting commission (HR 55 & SR 20 in the upcoming 2021/22 session). The Transparency Act is a good intermediate step to increase transparency in the redistricting process (HB 189 & SB 186 in the upcoming 2021/22 session) . Please put my community, city of Decatur, into one House district. Our small city is currently divided into four house districts and represented by four different legislators. This makes it difficult for our community to have consistent representation focused on our issues. Thank you for taking these comments seriously in this critical process."

6/23/2021H. Chambers of Towns County
"Make districts in common geographical areas where people share common issues. Our District is like a banana and shouldn't be. Our issues have little in common with issues in Hartwell. Our population has seasonal shifts because of 'summer homes'. We may have 10,000 or so in the winter and over 20,000 in summer; not to mention all the traffic from being 2 hours away from Atlanta. Our district should be shared with local counties such as Union, Rabun, White, etc, and not with Stephens, Franklin, and Hart who have more issues with being on the I-85 corridor and manufacturing issues. Our issues are more in dealing with where to put people: apartments, multi-story homes, transportation, and sewage and garbage disposal."

6/23/2021P. McKibben of Glynn County
"Ga legislators just passed a 98 page Bill that added many new restrictions on Ga voters. This was done because our state reps felt under the gun from it's citizens to do a better job and restore confidence in elections. Confidence in Elections is one thing. Now Ga citizens want to have confidence in the new district maps. Drawing those maps should be just like elections. Fair, balanced, transparent, and secure. The committee that draws those new maps should be balanced. Evenly. Between Repubs and Dems. The reapportionment committee is made up of 10 Repubs and 5 Democrats. That is not balanced or fair. Ga citizens want a balanced and fair process to draw new district maps. There should be the same number of Repubs and Dems. Will you create a fair and balanced redistricting commission made up of an equal number of party members?"

6/23/2021P. McKibben of Glynn County
"When Elections are held in Ga there is a balance of poll workers. Both Repubs and Dems work together to administer the election process from beginning to end. Many times along the way it is required to have at least one Repub and one Dem to make sure there are equal protections to maintain the integrity of the election. Shouldn't the same balance be required for drawing new district maps? The Redistricting committee is made up of 10 Republicans and only 5 Democrats. Why? As a Ga voter I want to see balance and fairness in drawing new district maps. There should be a 7 - 7 split of Repubs and Dems. The Chair should be a neutral member. Other states do this split with the chair appointed by the state Supreme Court Judge. A respected Judge as the chair to oversee and exercising a tie breaking vote based on Ga law and not by partisan party members. Having safe, fair, secure, and transparent elections is what Ga voters want. Ga voters also want fair, balanced, representation they choose. Ga voters don't want politicians choosing their voters by drawing new district maps in their favor. SCOTUS didn't rule on partisan gerrymandering. The high court is leaving that matter to the states. So what I hear them say is, Ga voters will have to sue if they see partisan gerrymandering. We'll do what we have to do to exercise our right to representation. Please do your job to make reapportionment & redistricting fair, transparent, and balanced. Please answer my question: Ga Elections are administered by both Republicans and Democrats so all Ga citizens have trust in a secure, fair, transparent election. Why shouldn't drawing new district maps be administered in the same way? By an equal number of Repubs/Dems and a neutral independent chair. Don't Georgia citizens deserve fair maps?"

6/22/2021P. McCrary of Columbia County
"Thank you to the chair and the redistricting commission for giving Georgians an opportunity to have a voice in the redistricting process. My name is Paul McCrary and I am from a veteran family in Grovetown, Georgia. As a resident of Grovetown for 16 years, I saw first hand how this city grew quickly due to the influence that Fort Gordon has on communities like mine. Currently families of service members and veterans largely live southwest of I-20 in Columbia County mainly within the cities of Harlem and Grovetown. Many members of the military choose to reside here due to lower housing costs as well as how close these cities are from their jobs at Fort Gordon, which is head of the U.S. Army's Cyber Command center. As of right now our community is split in half by the state senate and federal Congressional maps. This makes it harder for service member families who decide to register to vote in Georgia as well as veterans to have a say in who represents them in the state and federal legislative bodies. Over time, this community has been settled by veteran families that are often impacted by government programs such as the VA and military benefits. It is easier for the concerns of military families in my community to get proper attention when our community is unified under one district, rather than placed in two districts as my community currently is under both the state senate and federal levels. Electing someone from our community who understands the importance of serving in the military the way that members of my community understand it is essential to ensuring that my community is being fairly represented throughout the next decade in the state legislature. Thank you for this opportunity to address you today about my community of Grovetown, GA."

6/22/2021E. Ward of Fulton County
Districting should be not be political manipulation by the party with the most power. Gerrymandering robs voters of our Constitutional right to elect our own representatives. Elected officials don't feel compelled to represent the will of their constituents. Lawmakers have no incentive to work toward bipartisan solutions and this leads to inefficient and ineffective government and a waste of my significant taxpayer dollars. I will vote against anyone who is part of gerrymandering.

6/22/2021K. Lawler of Fulton County
"Prepared Submission by Ken Lawler, Chair, Fair Districts GA for Joint Committee Hearing on redistricting, June 15, 2021 Chairs Kennedy, Rich and Members of the Committees, I am Ken Lawler, Chair of Fair Districts GA and am pleased to have the opportunity to testify at this hearing that begins the process of public participation in redistricting. Fair Districts GA is a non-partisan organization. Our sole mission is the production of fair maps for the Georgia General Assembly and Congressional delegation using a process that is transparent and adheres to common redistricting principles. We do not favor the election of any candidate or political party. I am here today to ask for three things: public & community participation, a transparent process, and fair maps. We define fair maps as not favoring one political party over another, yet reflecting the natural political preferences of Georgia's population. In addition fair maps must provide adequate minority representation, complying with the Voting Rights Act. Georgians deserve a redistricting process that inspires trust and confidence from all citizens. In the past, the bulk of the redistricting work has taken place behind closed doors with only minimal public involvement and disclosure. As a result, the State of Georgia has been the subject of near-constant gerrymandering since at least the 2001 redistricting cycle. Weak state constitutional standards give elected legislators wide latitude to draw redistricting plans that favor the majority party. Furthermore, the process as currently designed favors secrecy over transparency. While these hearings provide some measure of public participation, by themselves they are not sufficient to inspire trust and confidence. We, along with other like-minded organizations, are asking you to make three significant changes this year. First: Listen. Draw maps that reflect community input. Redistricting has a very real impact on the voices of citizens in every county, city, and town. Legislators must listen carefully to communities across the state about their desired representation, and they must account for that input when drawing maps. Communities, in turn, must clearly express their rationale for cohesive representation. Many groups across Georgia will be organizing communities to provide input at public hearings and deploying tools such as Representable.org and DistrictR that enable citizens to define communities of interest and legislators to incorporate them into maps. Second: Check your work. Commit to adopting non-partisan, objective benchmarks for the mapping of voting districts. Georgia has become a swing state over the last 2 election cycles (2018 & 2020). Our legislative districts should accurately reflect that status. This does not necessarily mean that our General Assembly should be divided 50-50. But it does mean that our district maps should reflect our natural political geography based on the 2020 census. The most important thing we can do to create fair maps is to adopt non-partisan, independent benchmarks, or fairness tests, for the maps. Fair Districts GA is partnering with the Princeton Gerrymandering Project to provide such benchmarks. These benchmarks will provide in advance the number of expected Republican, Democratic, and competitive districts. And they will provide the expected number of minority districts. The attach fact sheet provides more details. We are pleased to announce today that we have completed phase 1 of the work, a study of the past 20 years of redistricting in Georgia. Tomorrow, June 16, at 4pm, we have invited all of you to a legislators-only briefing at which we will be presenting our findings for the first time. And we will discuss plans for creating benchmarks in time for map drawing later this year. The advanced analytics behind these benchmarks has never before been used in Georgia; in fact they did not exist in 2011. FDGA and PGP are proud to be bringing this innovation and expertise to your committees. Adopting these benchmarks will go a long way towards building trust and confidence in the process. In addition, we believe that maps meeting independent benchmarks may help Georgia avoid costly litigation. Third: Show your work. Make the process public and transparent. We and 19 other organizations sent you a letter on April 19, 2021 (bit.ly/FairMapsGA) requesting a detailed set of changes to the redistricting guidelines. Today we restate that request. I call your attention to a few of the requested changes: * Waive the secrecy provisions surrounding all legislative and staff work on redistricting * Conduct additional public comment hearings around the state once full census data and proposed maps are available * Allow the public 2 weeks between release of proposed maps and hearings in special session to study and provide comment * Release a list of all factors, including demographic and political, that were used in drafting the maps The signatories to the April 19 letter are prepared to meet at your convenience to discuss all the requested changes. The work of redistricting can and should be done in full view of the public. The days when gerrymandering was obvious due to contorted district shapes are long gone. The public cannot speak out against unfair maps because the damage is invisible and done in secret. These three changes should not be difficult to adopt. We don't believe anyone can reasonably argue that secrecy is better than transparency. Freely available, modern technology provides clear and measurable yardsticks for fair maps. Listening and being accountable to citizens is simply part of the job. I'm available to answer any questions you have. ? Attachment 1: Princeton Gerrymandering Project - Fair Districts GA collaboration fact sheet The State of Georgia has been the subject of near-constant gerrymandering since at least the 2000 census and 2001 redistricting cycle. Weak state constitutional standards give elected legislators wide latitude to draw redistricting plans that favor the majority party. With Georgia emerging as a swing state in the 2018 and 2020 elections, the 2021 redistricting cycle presents the best opportunity in decades to re-balance Georgia's Congressional delegation and state legislature. The Princeton Gerrymandering Project (PGP) and Fair Districts GA (FDGA) are collaborating to provide independent, non-partisan analysis of Georgia's political landscape for the state legislature and the public during the 2021 redistricting cycle. PGP and FDGA expect to provide the following: ? Background research into the 20-year history of gerrymandering in Georgia leading up to the 2021 decennial redistricting ? Independent statistical benchmarks for partisan balance, racial balance, and degree of incumbency protection in advance of legislative map-drawing for Congressional, state house, and state senate electoral maps ? Evaluation of proposed maps drawn by the Georgia legislature against the benchmarks ? Assistance to Georgia stakeholders in defining communities of interest as an input to redistricting, using Representable.org ? Education for legislators and the public about what constitutes a transparent and fair redistricting plan About Princeton Gerrymandering Project Operating at the intersection of law, math, and political science, PGP (gerrymander.princeton.edu) is dedicated to reforming redistricting nationwide. PGP's state-of-the art analysis will use existing maps and recent election results to uncover the true extent of gerrymandering in Georgia. Using 2020 census data, PGP will create benchmarks for fair electoral maps that can be used to evaluate proposed maps drawn by the Georgia state legislature. Experts have submitted similar analysis as testimony in significant anti-gerrymandering litigation in federal and state courts. About Fair Districts GA Fair Districts GA is the sole nonpartisan organization in Georgia focused exclusively on fighting gerrymandering, the practice of drawing legislative district lines to favor one group over another. Our ultimate goal is to reform Georgia's process for drawing state and federal electoral maps. We support stronger standards and a nonpartisan, transparent, accountable redistricting process. For further information, contact Jason Rhode, PGP National Coordinator, jrhode@princeton.edu or Ken Lawler, FDGA Chair, kdlawler@bellsouth.net."

6/22/2021P. Viloria of Unknown County
"I grew up in Gwinnett County, the most diverse county in the state. I was a student at Gwinnett County public schools from 5th grade to my high school graduation and am proud of the rich experience that my district was able to afford me. That being said, it is important that my community stays together and is not divided as part of political negotiations. Gwinnett County thrives in its diversity."

6/21/2021P. McKibben of Glynn County
"You're going to have 10 public meetings leading up to Reapportionment. It's imperative that you also create public input during Reapportionment map drawing. Each map drawn by your committee should have a time period for comment, suggested changes, and public review."

6/21/2021A. Royal of Unknown County
Gerrymandering is a major threat to our democracy. Please take a stand against it.

6/21/2021J. Yost of Tift County
Please redraw voting districts fairly! Districts should not be gerrymandered to allow any one party to gain an advantage.

6/21/2021Q. of Cobb County
Thank you!! Plus add full Bearenstein attornies plus for Kushners return back into politics and also full Moores with more with licensing for Hollywood and against Governor Kemp and also his own ways into TT Studios aka Black Hollywood plus his own bad documents and also children killed illegally and then removing full group into a jail soon from serial prisoners and Aids release plus bishops associated and need full ways into three Disney children's funds and also lose most of GMC South Johanessburg females and into child pimping and after full Aisha K Guiles along with hating their own children for wealth and kidnappers plus Attyya K. Guiles a stupid one and Gibbs Zimbaand bwe forced by VP Keisha Lance Bottoms and one Edmond female mild and De Honor Judge Taft Guiles and full Charles Cusack then evil plus demo rollers and also framing full Aisha K. Guiles for her wealth and Tyler Perry in this too much weight and ISIS deploys into his ways of wanting his own military and then destroying full Pentagon here and somewhere else and upset with Nipsey plus also Hollywood funds and wealthy plus Aisha K. Guiles is Queen of Scots and then in a way to dictate to wealthy celebrities for route closure and then access legally to funds and non understanding from full occult and embalming him with wrong embalming fluid for a John Guiles remove them back into SC and sue and criminally charge them plus Bishop Michael Blue and also Bishop Eddie Long and then guilty for child rape and remove Navy Officer Eddie into full San Diego jail and released for illegal framing of John Becoat and his family into prison and then fully innocent with this and they are guilty and hanged plus also for Selvt occult and fools from Virginia the Williams Dennis L and grandfather plus family and grandmother's who are drug dealers for mild Hollywood

6/21/2021C. White of Clayton County
"I want reapportionment to be addressed based on fairness, NOT about maintaining GOP seats or having democrats running against one another in order to dilute the number of democrats in our state legislature. It is time to focus on the citizens and not what the GOP wants. We want fairness and equality in redistricting process in Georgia. It is tiring to see communities split in half, counties split so that those in leadership the past twenty years can keep control. Take your political party out of citizens rights to be represented the way citizens want to be represented."

6/19/2021T. James of Douglas County
"As member of the Armed Forces, I believe in democracy. I believe that lawmakers choosing their constituents is immoral and unconstitutional."

6/19/2021D. HOFFMAN of Fulton County
HELLO MR.JACKSON I RECEIVED YOUR INFORMATION FROM DAVID SCOTT HE INSISTED ME ON GETTING MY INCOME TAX THAT HAD BEEN ON HOLD AND I EXPLAINED TO HIM ABOUT MY UNEMPLOYMENT THAT I BEEN WAITING ON SINCE LAST YEAR.THE LAST NOTICE I RECEIVED FROM GDOL WAS THEY WAS RECACULATING MY AMOUNT.CAN YOU PLEASE HELP ME GET MY UNEMPLOYMENT BENEFITS.IM READY TO RETURN BACK TO WORK BUT CANT DO SO UNTIL I MOVE INTO A STABLE PLACE WITH MY CHILDREN.THANK YOU IN ADVANCE

6/18/2021M. Zuluaga of Fulton County
"My name is Michelle Zuluaga and I am the Civic Participation Manager for the Latino Community Fund Georgia. We are a 501 [c] 3, we lead the Latino for Democracy coalition and are part of the Georgia Redistricting Alliance. Latinos for Democracy is currently leading an effort to educate the latino community about the redistricting process in Georgia. This has not come without its challenges. Although dates and times have been announced to the public about the redistricting public hearings throughout the state; The locations have yet to be announced. This is critical information so that community members will show up and have their say on how these impactful lines will be drawn throughout their communities and ultimately decide the fate that their communities will live. Let me be clear, we need to know the locations of where the hearings will be held well in advance so that community members will be present. We also ask that when you draw these impactful lines, racial equity be at the forefront of everyone's mind. It is important for all electoral districts to reflect the communities that live in them and for life changing resources such as parks and recreation, education, and accurate representation at the municipal, state and federal level to be set in place for all. As communities change and become more diverse, it is critical for district maps to reflect that. When we have accurate representation our communities get access to resources that many take for granted such as language accessibility, access to the polls, public transportation, and a place for our community members to gather and connect as one. This is why we stand with many when we say we want maps that will Unite our state and not divide our communities. This is why we need Unity Maps."

6/17/2021D. Parker of Fulton County
"We demand language equity. Joint redistricting committees must demonstrate a commitment to include all Georgians, this means providing resources, including announcements, fact sheets and any public facing materials into a minimum set of languages required to reach diverse Georgians (at least Spanish, Korean, Vietnamese, Mandarin/Cantonese, Hindi, Arabic). Also, demonstrate language access by providing for interpretation where necessary and feasible to gain public input. Moreover, the website used to broadcast public input sessions or share maps must be compliant with S.508 of the U.S. Rehabilitation Act, making it accessible to people with disabilities. Public townhalls currently scheduled by the joint redistricting committees are insufficient. The public does not have enough information in order to be meaningfully engaged, including census data, draft maps, or information about the special redistricting session that is rumored to be held this year. Moreover, the public hearings do not include Gwinnett county, the most diverse county in the Southeast and one of the fastest growing counties in Georgia. This is entirely unacceptable. We demand public hearings after draft maps are released and that adequately cover the entire state."

6/17/2021O. Aguado of Barrow County

6/17/2021K. Ramachandran of DeKalb County
"June 15, 2021 To: The Honorable Geoff Duncan, Lieutenant Governor, Georgia State Senate The Honorable David Ralston, Speaker of the Georgia House of Representatives All members of Georgia House Legislative & Congressional Reapportionment Committee All members of Georgia Senate Reapportionment & Redistricting Committee VIA Email Dear Lt. Gov. Duncan, Speaker Ralston, Senators, and Representatives: Despite repeated calls from advocates for transparency and inclusion in redistricting processes, the Georgia Legislature has failed to respond. We demand transparency and inclusion with redistricting processes at every level of government. The current systems do not work for Black, Brown, and immigrant communities of Georgia. Our communities must be part of the process in meaningful ways to ensure that we are not further disenfranchised by racial and partisan gerrymandering. We the undersigned demand the following: Our communities' voices must be part of the redistricting process. We have data and we have information that should be considered when redrawing district lines. We demand that there is ample opportunity for our community members to share this information. We demand that community members have ample opportunity to give input on proposed maps after census data has been factored into the maps. We demand that our input is not only heard but also considered when finalizing district maps. Joint committees must respond to our submissions and state their actions. Redistricting must not be a partisan activity that protects those who are already in office. Redistricting should protect the ability of our communities to elect a candidate of choice into office. We demand that the criteria used to create maps at every level of government is released to the public via an accessible website. Hearings to consider redistricting bills must be publicly accessible either in person or via video access. This includes delegation meetings that will consider and approve county commission and county school board maps. We demand language equity. Joint redistricting committees must demonstrate a commitment to include all Georgians, this means providing resources, including announcements, fact sheets and any public facing materials into a minimum set of languages required to reach diverse Georgians (at least Spanish, Korean, Vietnamese, Mandarin/Cantonese, Hindi, Arabic). Also, demonstrate language access by providing for interpretation where necessary and feasible to gain public input. Moreover, the website used to broadcast public input sessions or share maps must be compliant with S.508 of the U.S. Rehabilitation Act, making it accessible to people with disabilities. Public townhalls currently scheduled by the joint redistricting committees are insufficient. The public does not have enough information in order to be meaningfully engaged, including census data, draft maps, or information about the special redistricting session that is rumored to be held this year. Moreover, the public hearings do not include Gwinnett county, the most diverse county in the Southeast and one of the fastest growing counties in Georgia. This is entirely unacceptable. We demand public hearings after draft maps are released and that adequately cover the entire state. Sincerely, 9 to 5 Georgia All On The Line Amani Women Center Asian American Advocacy Fund Asian Americans Advancing Justice-Atlanta Asian Youth for Civic Engagement Association of Zambians in Atlanta Athena's Warehouse Black Alliance for Just Immigration (BAJI) Black Voters Matter Fund Burmese Rohingya Community of Georgia (BRCG) Center for Pan Asian Community Services COALICION DE LIDERES LATINOS- CLILA Common Cause Georgia El Refugio Eritrean-American Community Association of GA Fair Count Fair Districts GA Fair Fight Action Feminist Women's Health Center GA Familias Unidas Georgia Alliance For Progress Georgia Association of Latino Elected Officials (GALEO) Georgia Coalition for the People's Agenda Georgia Conservation Voters Georgia Muslim Voter Project Georgia STAND-UP Georgia WAND Hispanic Young Professionals & Entrepreneurs (HYPE) Latino Community Fund Inc. Latino LinQ League of Women Voters of Georgia Los Vecinos de Buford Highway Migrant Equity Southeast (MESE) New American Pathways Planned Parenthood Southeast Advocates Progress Georgia Refugee Women's Network Rep GA Institute, Inc. Somali American Community Center Southeast Immigrant Rights Network South Georgia Voters' League State Innovation Exchange Step Up Savannah Sur Legal Collaborative U-Lead Athens Women of Purpose Global Ministries Women Watch Afrika"

6/17/2021A. Sato of Fulton County
"Please be aware that citizens of Georgia are watching. We understand that legislators will be working under a tight timeline but ask that you provide a transparent and fair redistricting session in 2021. Please provide timely and ample notification of the process. Citizens need time and information to plan and participate in open hearings. Provide open access to the census data as you receive it. Construct districts that allow voters to choose their legislators instead of permitting legislators to choose their voters. The redistricting process in Georgia (and many states) has historically favored incumbents and both parties are complicit. According to historical analysis compiled by Fair Districts Georgia, Democrats in 2002 received 46% of the votes but maintained 59% of seats in the Georgia legislature. In 2012, Republicans received 53% of the votes but maintained 68% of seats in the Georgia legislature. This is undemocratic and violates the notion of one person, one vote. Furthermore, this unfair redistricting practice erodes our democratic system. Please use a non-partisan or bi-partisan commission to construct these impactful lines. Constituents would be assured that their communities and needs are fairly represented if politicians were removed from the redistricting process. Protect minority groups and communities of interest by requiring this commission adhere to strict fair districting standards that assure no undue political influence; thus favoring no political party."

6/17/2021S. Sohani of Fulton County
"June 15, 2021 To: The Honorable Geoff Duncan, Lieutenant Governor, Georgia State Senate The Honorable David Ralston, Speaker of the Georgia House of Representatives All members of Georgia House Legislative & Congressional Reapportionment Committee All members of Georgia Senate Reapportionment & Redistricting Committee Dear Lt. Gov. Duncan, Speaker Ralston, Senators, and Representatives, My name is Salik Sohani and I am a Community Organizer with Georgia Muslim Voter Project (GAMVP). GAMVP is a nonpartisan organization that works to civically engage Muslim communities and the individuals that reside among them in an effort to increase voter registration, voters' awareness and their desire to actively participate in the democratic process. The communities we serve - the Muslim, immigrant, Black and Brown communities - have been politically underrepresented for far too long. Historically, our community has been considered to be apathetic toward voting and civic engagement. As such, our community member's opinions have been devalued and we have lacked representation within each district. I assure you that we are not apathetic. Our communities across the state continue to advocate for fair representation by demonstrating unprecedented voter participation in local and federal elections. Surveys indicate that AAPI early voters in the 2020 election exceeded their 2016 turnout by 58%, which demonstrates the enthusiasm among AAPI voters, many of whom are Muslim, to provide their input regarding their elected officials and the decisions that affect the interests of their communities. Redistricting is one of our community's interests and we demand that our voices are considered throughout the redistricting process. Furthermore, we demand additional transparency throughout the redistricting process. Our communities seek to be actively involved within redistricting, however information about public town halls, the upcoming special redistricting session, census data, and draft maps has been virtually nonexistent. We demand this information be widely disseminated among our communities and be made accessible to all Georgians regardless of their background. Sincerely, Salik Sohani, Community Organizer"

6/17/2021A. Dennis of Fulton County
"Honorable Members of the Joint Reapportionment Committees Committee: My name is Aunna Dennis and I am the Executive Director of Common Cause Georgia. Common Cause has long been an advocate for fair and transparent redistricting processes across the country, including working with legislative champions to support redistricting reform legislation in Georgia. For too long, redistricting has been done behind closed doors, placing the needs of partisan politicians over the needs of communities. 2021 is an opportunity to change that. Accordingly, Common Cause strongly urges the Georgia General Assembly to commit to a fair, transparent, and open process of drawing district lines that prioritizes communities, particularly Black, Latinx, AAPI, Indigenous and other communities of color that have traditionally been left out of the process. During the previous redistricting cycles many decisions were made in secret and with sparse public input nor knowledge of proceedings. This past April Common Cause Georgia and 16 other organizations have called on the legislature to amend Georgia's Open Meetings Act to be transparent. If we are to both rebuild trust in our government and ensure that every Georgia voter has equal opportunity to elect candidates that share their lived experiences and values, we must guarantee that the redistricting process is open, transparent, and provides ample access for public input. Increasing transparency is a critical part of a fair redistricting process. This should include: 1) Holding several in person and virtual hearings across the state at a variety of times during the day to encourage comment and participation from as many Georgians as possible. 2) These hearings should be scheduled with sufficient advance notice to allow those who want to participate enough time to prepare; 3) Creating multiple avenues for public comment to be submitted, including but not limited to, a website portal, an email address, public hearings, etc. 4) Providing live language translation services so that Georgians who do not speak English can participate. We also recommend providing a tran[script] of each proceeding to ensure accessibility for those who cannot attend; 5) Providing public access to the data used to draft maps as well as a public comment period on draft or final maps before passage. Consider using official procurement procedures to obtain mapping experts, redistricting legal experts, and any other contractors who may be used in the redistricting process. 6) Provide a written report explaining the justification for decisions to divide communities, municipalities, or counties. This report should be released concurrently with the final maps and should be available for public review online. Common Cause looks forward to working with the Georgia General Assembly to ensure that the 2021 redistricting process works for all Georgians and ensures that everyone has an equal opportunity to make their voice heard in the redistricting process. In Community, Aunna Dennis"

6/16/2021J. Collins of Unknown County
"When a political party has to cheat in order to stay in authority, it is no longer a political party but resembles a cult. A rather ugly and divisive cult. Gerrymandering and voter repression done by any party is cheating, and the result in the intermediate term will probably lead to the ultimate loss of our Republic. I personally have little doubt that this or any other opinion might in any way give a dominant political party in the deciding majority a second thought before proceeding toward cheating via gerrymandered districts and any other schemes now being devised and passed into law, however as a citizen of our state and of the nation I leave this comment as historical record. It may at some point be an unfortunate kind of ""we told you so"" unless we change course and revive the spirit and character of statesmanship (excluding the period skirmish known as the Civil War) that made the United States in the rest of the previous twenty five decades ""united""."

6/16/2021D. Fleck of Forsyth County
"The redistricting process should be non-partisan, not bi-partisan, or purely partisan. Areas should be determined by geography and existing political boundaries in order to make fair local districts."

6/16/2021J. OLIVER of Fayette County
Georgia State House District 72 was configured simply by following the city limits line of Peachtree City without regard for citizen input. The residents of Sedgewicke subdivision and Sumner road in Fayette County respectfully request to be removed from State House district 64 and be placed into State House district 72 as presently represented by Josh Bonner.